CHAPTER I: Of Value

§ 1. [Preliminary remarks] The subject on whiach we are now about to
enter fills so important and conspicuous a position in political
economy, that in the apprehension of some thinkers its boundaries
confound themselves with those of the science itself. One eminent writer
has proposed as a name for Political Economy, “Catallactics,” or the
science of exchanges: by others it has been called the Science of
Values. If these denominations had appeared to me logically correct, I
must have placed the discussion of the elementary laws of value at the
commencement of our inquiry, instead of postponing it to the Third Part;
and the possibility of so long deferring it is alone a sufficient proof
that this view of the nature of Political Economy is too confined. It is
true that in the preceding Books we have not escaped the necessity of
anticipating some small portion of the theory of Value, especially as to
the value of labour and of land. It is nevertheless evident, that of the
two great departments of Political Economy, the production of wealth and
its distribution, the consideration of Value has to do with the latter
alone; and with that, only so far as competition, and not usage or
custom, is the distributing agency. The conditions and laws of
Production would be the same as they are, if the arrangements of society
did not depend on Exchange, or did not admit of it. Even in the present
system of industrial life, in which employments are minutely subdivided,
and all concerned in production depend for their remuneration on the
price of a particular commodity, exchange is not the fundamental law of
the distribution of the produce, no more than roads and carriages are
the essential laws of motion, but merely a part of the machinery for
effecting it. To confound these ideas, seems to me, not only a logical,
but a practical blunder. It is a case of the error too common in
political economy, of not distinguishing between necessities arising
from athe nature of thingsa, and those created by social arrangements:
an error, which appears to me to be at all times producing two opposite
mischiefs; on the one hand, causing political economists to class the
merely temporary truths of their subject among its permanent and
universal laws; and on the other, leading many persons to mistake the
permanent laws of Production (such as those on Edition: current; Page:
[456] which the necessity is grounded of restraining population) for
temporary accidents arising from the existing constitution of
society—which those who would frame a new system of social arrangements,
are at liberty to disregard.

In a state of society, however, in which the industrial system is
entirely founded on purchase and sale, each individualb, for the most
part,b living not on things in the production of which he himself bears
a part, but on things obtained by a double exchange, a sale followed by
a purchase—the question of Value is fundamental. Almost every
speculation respecting the economical interests of a society thus
constituted, implies some theory of Value: the smallest error on that
subject infects with corresponding error all our other conclusions; and
anything vague or misty in our conception of it, creates confusion and
uncertainty in everything else. Happily, there is nothing in the laws of
Value which remains for the present or any future writer to clear up;
the theory of the subject is complete: the only difficulty to be
overcome is that of so stating it as to solve by anticipation the chief
perplexities which occur in applying it: and to do this, some minuteness
of exposition, and considerable demands on the patience of the reader,
are unavoidable. He will be amply repaid, however (if a stranger to
these inquiries), by the ease and rapidity with which a thorough
understanding of this subject will enable him to fathom most of the
remaining questions of political economy.

§ 2. [Definitions of Value in Use, Exchange Value, and Price] We must
begin by settling our phraseology. Adam Smith, in a passage often
quoted, has touched upon the most obvious ambiguity of the word value;
which, in one of its senses, signifies usefulness, in another, power of
purchasing; in his own language, value in use and value in exchange. But
(as Mr. De Quincey has remarked) in illustrating this double meaning,
Adam Smith has himself fallen into another ambiguity. Things (he says)
which have the greatest value in use have often little or no value in
exchange; which is true, since that which can be obtained without labour
or sacrifice will command no price, however useful or needful it may be.
But he proceeds to add, that things which have the greatest value in
exchange, as a diamond for example, may have little or no value in use.
This is employing the word use, not in the sense in which political
economy is concerned with it, but in that other sense in which use is
opposed to pleasure. Political economy has nothing to do with the
comparative estimation of different uses in the judgment of a
philosopher or a moralist. The use of a thing, in political economy,
means its capacity to satisfy a desire, or serve a purpose. Diamonds
have this capacity in a high degree, and unless they Edition: current;
Page: [457] had it, would not bear any price. Value in use, or as Mr. De
Quincey calls it, teleologic value, is the extreme limit of value in
exchange. The exchange value of a thing may fall short, to any amount,
of its value in use; but that it can ever exceed the value in use,
implies a contradiction; it supposes that persons will give, to possess
a thing, more than the utmost value which they themselves put upon it as
a means of gratifying their inclinations.

The word Value, when used without adjunct, always means, in political
economy, value in exchange; or as it has been called by Adam Smith and
his successors, exchangeable value, a phrase which no amount of
authority that can be quoted for it can make other than bad English. Mr.
De Quincey substitutes the term Exchange Value, which is
unexceptionable.

Exchange value requires to be distinguished from Price. The words Value
and Price were used as synonymous by the early political economists, and
are not always discriminated even by Ricardo. But the most accurate
modern writers, to avoil the wasteful expenditure of two good scientific
terms on a single idea, have employed Price to express the value of a
thing in relation to money; the quantity of money for which it will
exchange. By the price of a thing, therefore, we shall henceforth
understand its value in money; by the value, or exchange value of a
thing, its general power of purchasing; the command which its possession
gives over purchaseable commodities in general.

§ 3. [What is meant by general purchasing power] But here a fresh demand
for explanation presents itself. What is meant by command over
commodities in general? The same thing exchanges for a great quantity of
some commodities, and for a very small quantity of others. A suit of
clothes exchanges for a great quantity of bread, and for a very small
quantity of precious stones. The value of a thing in exchange for some
commodities may be rising, for others falling. A coat may exchange for
less bread this year than last, if the harvest has been bad, but for
more glass or iron, if a tax has been taken off those commodities, or an
improvement made in their manufacture. Has the value of the coat,
aundera these circumstances, fallen or risen? It is impossible to say:
all that can be said is, that it has fallen in relation to one thing,
and risen in respect to another. But there is another case, in which no
one would have any hesitation in saying what sort of change had taken
place in the value of the coat: namely, if the cause in which the
disturbance of exchange values originated, was something directly
affecting the coat itself, and not the bread or the glass. Suppose, for
example, that an invention had been made in machinery, by which
broadcloth could be woven at half the former Edition: current; Page:
[458] cost. The effect of this would be to lower the value of a coat,
and if lowered by this cause, it would be lowered not in relation to
bread only or to glass only, but to all purchaseable things, except such
as happened to be affected at the very time by a similar depressing
cause. We should therefore say, that there had been a fall in the
exchange value or general purchasing power of a coat. The idea of
general exchange value originates in the fact, that there really are
causes which tend to alter the value of a thing in exchange for things
generally, that is, for all things which are not themselves acted upon
by causes of similar tendency.

In considering exchange value scientifically, it is expedient to
abstract from bitb all causes except those which originate in the very
commodity under consideration. Those which originate in the commodities
with which we compare it, affect its value in relation to cthosec
commodities; but those which originate in itself, affect its value in
relation to all commodities. In order the more completely to confine our
attention to these last, it is convenient to assume that all commodities
but the one in question remain invariable in their relative values. When
we are considering the causes which raise or lower the value of corn, we
suppose that woollens, silks, cutlery, sugar, timber, &c., while varying
in their power of purchasing corn, remain constant in the proportions in
which they exchange for one another. On this assumption, any one of them
may be taken as a representative of all the rest; since in whatever
manner corn varies in value with respect to any one commodity, it varies
in the same manner and degree with respect to every other; and the
upward or downward movement of its value estimated in some one thing, is
all that dneedd be considered. Its money value, therefore, or price,
will represent as well as anything else its general exchange value, or
purchasing power; and from an obvious convenience, will often be
employed by us in that representative character; with the proviso that
money itself do not vary in its general purchasing power, but that the
prices of all things, other than that which we happen to be considering,
remain unaltered.

§ 4. [Value a relative term. A general rise or fall of values is a
contradiction] The distinction between Value and Price, as we have now
refined them, is so obvious, as scarcely to seem in need of any
illustration. But in political economy the greatest errors arise from
overlooking the most obvious truths. Simple as this distinction is, it
has consequences with which a reader unacquainted with the subject would
do well to begin early by making himself thoroughly familiar. The
following is one of the principal. Edition: current; Page: [459] There
is such a thing as a general rise of prices. All commodities may rise in
their money price. But there cannot be a general rise of values. It is a
contradiction in terms. A can only rise in value by exchanging for a
greater quantity of B and C; in which case these must exchange for a
smaller quantity of A. All things cannot rise relatively to one another.
If one-half of the commodities in the market rise in exchange value, the
very terms imply a fall of the other half; and reciprocally, the fall
implies a rise. Things which are exchanged for one another can no more
all fall, or all rise, than a dozen runners can each outrun all the
rest, or a hundred trees all overtop one another. Simple as this truth
is, we shall presently see that ait is lost sight of in some of the most
accredited doctrines both of theorists and of what are called practical
mena. And as a first specimen, we may instance the great importance
attached in the imagination of most people to a rise or fall of general
prices. Because when the price of any one commodity rises, the
circumstance usually indicates a rise of its value, people have an
indistinct feeling when all prices rise, as if all things simultaneously
had risen in value, and all the possessors had become enriched. That the
money prices of all things should rise or fall, provided they all rise
or fall equally, is in itselfb, and apart from existing contracts,b of
no consequencec. It affects nobody’s wages, profits, or rent. Every one
gets more money in the one case and less in the other; but of all that
is to be bought with money they get neither more nor less than before.
It makes no other difference than that of using more or fewer counters
to reckon by. The only thing which in this case is really altered in
value is money; and the only persons who either gain or lose are the
holders of money, or those who have to receive or to pay fixed sums of
it. There is a difference to annuitants and to creditors the one way,
and to those who are burthened with annuities, or with debts, the
contrary way. There is a disturbance, in short, of fixed money
contracts; and this is an evil, whether it takes place in the debtor’s
favour or in the creditor’s. But as to future transactions there is no
difference to any one. Let it therefore be remembered (and occasions
will often arise for calling it to mind) that a general rise or a
general fall of values is a contradiction; and that a general rise or a
general fall of prices is merely tantamount to an alteration in the
value of money, and is a matter of complete indifference, save in so far
as it affects existing contracts for receiving and paying fixed
pecuniary amountsd, and (it must be added) as it affects the interests
of the producers of moneyd.

Edition: current; Page: [460]
§ 5. [How the laws of Value are modified in their application to retail
transactions] Before commencing the inquiry into the laws of value and
price, I have one further observation to make. I must give warning, once
for all, that the cases I contemplate are those in which values and
prices are determined by competition alone. In so far only as they are
thus determined, can they be reduced to any assignable law. The buyers
must be supposed as studious to buy cheap, as the sellers to sell dear.
The values and prices, therefore, to which our conclusions apply, are
mercantile values and prices; such prices as are quoted in
price-currents; prices in the wholesale markets, in which buying as well
as selling is a matter of business; in which the buyers take pains to
know, and generally do know, the lowest price at which an article of a
given quality can be obtained; and in which, therefore, the axiom is
true, that there cannot be for the same article, of the same quality,
two prices in the same market. Our propositions will be true in a much
more qualified sense, of retail prices; the prices paid in shops for
articles of personal consumption. For such things there often are not
merely two, but many prices, in different shops, or even in the same
shop; habit and accident having as much to do in the matter as general
causes. Purchases for private use, even by people in business, are not
always made on business principles: the feelings which come into play in
the operation of getting, and in that of spending their income, are
often extremely different. Either from indolence, or acarelessnessa, or
because people think it fine to pay and ask no questions, three-fourths
of those who can afford it give much higher prices than necessary for
the things they consume; while the poor often do the same from ignorance
and defect of judgment, want of time for searching and making inquiry,
and not unfrequently from coercion, open or disguised. For these
reasons, retail prices do not follow with all the regularity which might
be expected, the action of the causes which determine wholesale prices.
The influence of those causes is ultimately felt in the retail markets,
and is the real source of such variations in retail prices as are of a
general and permanent character. But there is no regular or exact
correspondence. Shoes of equally good quality are sold in different
shops at prices which differ considerably; and the price of leather may
fall without causing the richer class of buyers to pay less for shoes.
Nevertheless, shoes do sometimes fall in price; and when they do, the
cause is always some such general circumstance as the cheapening of
leather: and when leather is cheapened, even if no difference shows
itself in bshops frequented by rich peopleb, the artizan and the
labourer generally get their shoes cheaper, and there is a visible
diminution in the contract prices at which shoes are delivered for the
supply of a Edition: current; Page: [461] workhouse or of a regiment. In
all reasoning about prices, the proviso must be understood, “supposing
all parties to take care of their own interest.” Inattention to these
distinctions has led to improper applications of the abstract principles
of political economy, and still oftener to an undue discrediting of
those principles, through their being compared with a different sort of
facts from those which they contemplate, or which can fairly be expected
to accord with them.

Edition: current; Page: [462]


CHAPTER II: aOfa Demand and Supply, in Their Relation to Value

§ 1. [Two conditions of Value: Utility, and Difficulty of Attainment]
That a thing may have any value in exchange, two conditions are
necessary. It must be of some use; that is (as already explained) it
must conduce to some purpose, satisfy some desire. No one will pay a
price, or part with anything which serves some of his purposes, to
obtain a thing which serves none of them. But, secondly, the thing must
not only have some utility, there must also be some difficulty in its
attainment. “Any article whatever,” says Mr. De Quincey,* “to obtain
that artificial sort of value which is meant by exchange value, must
begin by offering itself as a means to some desirable purpose; and
secondly, even though possessing incontestably this preliminary
advantage, it will never ascend to an exchange value in cases where it
can be obtained gratuitously and without effort; of which last terms
both are necessary as limitations. For often it will happen that some
desirable object may be obtained gratuitously; stoop, and you gather it
at your feet; but still, because the continued iteration of this
stooping exacts a laborious effort, very soon it is found, that to
gather for yourself virtually is not gratuitous. In the vast forests of
the Canadas, at intervals, wild strawberries may be gratuitously
gathered by shiploads: yet such is the exhaustion of a stooping posture,
and of a labour so monotonous, that everybody is soon glad to resign the
service into mercenary hands.”

As was pointed out in the last chapter, the utility of a thing in the
estimation of the purchaser, is the extreme limit of its exchange value:
higher the value cannot ascend; peculiar circumstances are required to
raise it so high. This topic is happily illustrated by Mr. De Quincey.
“Walk into almost any possible shop, buy the first article you see; what
will determine its price? In btheb ninety-nine cases out of a hundred,
simply the element D—difficulty of attainment. The other element U, or
intrinsic utility, will be perfectly inoperative. Let the thing
(measured by its uses) be, for your Edition: current; Page: [463]
purposes, worth ten guineas, so that you would rather give ten guineas
than lose it; yet, if the difficulty of producing it be only worth one
guinea, one guinea is the price which it will bear. But still not the
less, though U is inoperative, can U be supposed absent? By no
possibility; for, if it had been absent, assuredly you would not have
bought the article even at the lowest price. U acts upon you, though it
does not act upon the price. On the other hand, in the hundredth case,
we will suppose the circumstances reversed: you are on Lake Superior in
a steam-boat, making your way to an unsettled region 800 miles a-head of
civilization, and consciously with no chance at all of purchasing any
luxury whatsoever, little luxury or big luxury, for the space of ten
years to comec. Onec fellow-passenger, whom you will part with before
sunset, has a powerful musical snuff-box; knowing by experience the
power of such a toy over your own feelings, the magic with which at
times it lulls your agitations of mind, you are vehemently desirous to
purchase it. In the hour of leaving London you had forgot to do so; here
is a final chance. But the owner, aware of your situation not less than
yourself, is determined to operate by a strain pushed to the very
uttermost upon U, upon the intrinsic worth of the article in your
individual estimate for your individual purposes. He will not hear of D
as any controlling power or mitigating agency in the case; and finally,
although at six guineas a-piece in London or Paris you might have loaded
a waggon with such boxes, you pay sixty rather than lose it when the
last knell of the clock has sounded, which summons you to buy now or to
forfeit for ever. Here, as before, only one element is operative; before
it was D, now it is U. But after all, D was not absent, though
inoperative. The inertness of D allowed U to put forth its total effect.
The practical compression of D being withdrawn, U springs up like water
in a pump when released from the pressure of air. Yet still that D was
present to your thoughts, though the price was otherwise regulated, is
evident; both because U and D must coexist in order to found any case of
exchange value whatever, and because undeniably you take into very
particular consideration this D, the extreme difficulty of attainment
(which here is the greatest possible, viz. an impossibility) before you
consent to have the price racked up to U. The special D has vanished;
but it is replaced in your thoughts by an unlimited D. Undoubtedly you
have submitted to U in extremity as the regulating force of the price;
but it was under a sense of D’s latent presence. Yet D is so far from
exerting any positive force, that the retirement of D from all agency
whatever on the price—this it is which creates as it were a perfect
vacuum, and through that vacuum U rushes up to its highest and ultimate
gradation.”[*]

Edition: current; Page: [464]
This case, in which the value is wholly regulated by the necessities or
desires of the purchaser, is the case of strict and absolute monopoly;
in which, the article desired being only obtainable from one person, he
can exact any equivalent, short of the point at which no purchaser could
be found. But it is not a necessary consequence, even of complete
monopoly, that the value should be forced up to this ultimate limit; as
will be seen when we have considered the law of value in so far as
depending on the other element, difficulty of attainment.

§ 2. [Three kinds of Difficulty of Attainment] The difficulty of
attainment which determines value, is not always the same kind of
difficulty. It sometimes consists in an absolute limitation of the
supply. There are things of which it is physically impossible to
increase the quantity beyond certain narrow limits. Such are those wines
which can be grown only in peculiar circumstances of soil, climate, and
exposure. Such also are ancient sculptures; pictures by aold masters;
rare books or coins, or other articles of antiquarian curiosity. Among
such may also be reckoned houses and building-ground, in a town of
definite extent (such as Venice, or any fortified town where
fortifications are necessary to security); the most desirable sites in
any town whatever; houses and parks peculiarly favoured by natural
beauty, in places where that advantage is uncommon. Potentially, all
land whatever is a commodity of this class; and might be practically so,
in countries fully occupied and cultivated.

But there is another category (embracing the majority of all things that
are bought and sold), in which the obstacle to attainment consists only
in the labour and expense requisite to produce the commodity. Without a
certain labour and expense it cannot be had: but when any one is willing
to incur btheseb, there needs be no limit to the multiplication of the
product. If there were labourers enough and machinery enough, cottons,
woollens, or linens might be produced by thousands of yards for every
single yard now manufactured. There would be a point, no doubt, where
further increase would be stopped by the incapacity of the earth to
afford more of the material. But there is no need, for any purpose of
political economy, to contemplate a time when this ideal limit could
become a practical one.

There is a third case, intermediate between the two preceding, and
rather more complex, which I shall at present merely indicate, but the
importance of which in political economy is extremely great. There are
commodities which can be multiplied to an indefinite extent by labour
and expenditure, but not by a fixed amount of labour and expenditure.
Only a limited quantity can be produced at a given cost: if more is
wanted, it must be produced at a greater cost. To this class, as has
been often repeated, agricultural produce belongs; and generally all the
rude produce Edition: current; Page: [465] of the earth; and this
peculiarity is a source of very important consequences; one of which is
the necessity of a limit to population; and another, the payment of
rent.

§ 3. [Commodities which are absolutely limited in quantity] These being
the three classes, in one or other of which all things that are bought
and sold must take their place, we shall consider them in their order.
And first, of things absolutely limited in quantity, such as ancient
sculptures or pictures.

Of such things it is commonly said, that their value depends upon their
scarcity: but the expression is not sufficiently definite to serve our
purpose. Others say, with somewhat greater precision, that the value
depends on the demand and the supply. But even this statement requires
much explanation, to make it a clear exponent of the relation between
the value of a thing, and the causes of which that value is an effect.

The supply of a commodity is an intelligible expression: it means the
quantity offered for sale; the quantity that is to be had, at a given
time and place, by those who wish to purchase it. But what is meant by
the demand? Not the mere desire for the commodity. A beggar may desire a
adiamonda; but his desire, however great, will have no influence on the
price. Writers have therefore given a more limited sense to demand, and
have defined it, the wish to possess, combined with the power of
purchasing. To distinguish demand in this technical sense, from the
demand which is synonymous with desire, they call the former effectual
demand.* After this explanation, it is usually supposed that there
remains no further difficulty, and that the value depends upon the ratio
between the effectual demand, as thus defined, and the supply.

These phrases, however, fail to satisfy any one who requires clear
ideas, and a perfectly precise expression of them. Some confusion must
always attach to a phrase so inappropriate as that of a ratio between
two things not of the same denomination. What ratio can there be between
a quantity and a desire, or even a desire combined with a power? A ratio
between demand and supply is only intelligible if by demand we mean the
quantity demanded, and if the ratio intended is that between the
quantity demanded and the quantity supplied. But again, the quantity
demanded is not a fixed quantity, even at the same time and place; it
varies according to the value; Edition: current; Page: [466] if the
thing is cheap, there is usually a demand for more of it than when it is
dear. The demand, therefore, partly depends on the value. But it was
before laid down that the value depends on the demand. From this
contradiction how shall we extricate ourselves? How solve the paradox,
of two things, each depending upon the other?

Though the solution of these difficulties is obvious enough, the
difficulties themselves are not fanciful; and I bring them forward thus
prominently, because I am certain that they obscurely haunt every
inquirer into the subject who has not openly faced and distinctly
realized them. Undoubtedly the true solution must have been frequently
given, though I cannot call to mind any one who had given it before
myself, except the eminently clear thinker and skilful expositor, J. B.
Say. I should have imagined, however, that it must be familiar to all
political economists, if the writings of several did not give evidence
of some want of clearness on the point, and if the binstance of Mr. De
Quincey did not prove that the complete non-recognition and implied
denial of it are compatible with great intellectual ingenuity, and close
intimacy with the subject matterb.

§ 4. [The Equation of Demand and Supply is the law of their value]
Meaning, by the word demand, the quantity demanded, and remembering that
this is not a fixed quantity, but in general varies according to the
value, let us suppose that the demand at some particular time exceeds
the supply, that is, there are persons ready to buy, at the market
value, a greater quantity than is offered for sale. Competition takes
place on the side of the buyers, and the value rises: but how much? In
the ratio (some may suppose) of the deficiency: if the demand exceeds
the supply by one-third, the value rises one-third. By no means: for
when the value has risen one-third, the demand may still exceed the
supply; there may, even at that higher value, be a greater quantity
wanted than is to be had; and the competition of buyers may still
continue. If the article is a necessary of life, which, rather than
resign, people are willing to pay for at any price, a deficiency of
one-third may raise the price to double, triple, or quadruple.* Or, on
the Edition: current; Page: [467] contrary, the competition may cease
before the value has risen in even the proportion of the deficiency. A
rise, short of one-third, may place the article beyond the means, or
beyond the inclinations, of purchasers to the full amount. At what
point, then, will the rise be arrested? At the point, whatever it be,
which equalizes the demand and the supply: at the price which cuts off
the extra third from the demand, or brings forward additional sellers
sufficient to supply it. When, in either of these ways, or by a
combination of both, the demand becomes equal and no more than equal to
the supply, the rise of value will stop.

The converse case is equally simple. Instead of a demand beyond the
supply, let us suppose a supply exceeding the demand. The competition
will now be on the side of the sellers: the extra quantity can only find
a market by calling forth an additional demand equal to itself. This is
accomplished by means of cheapness; the value falls, and brings the
article within athea reach of more numerous bcustomersb, or induces
those who were already consumers to make increased purchases. cThe fall
of value required to re-establish equality, is different in different
cases.c The kinds of things in which ditd is commonly greatest are at
the two extremities of the scale; absolute necessaries, or those
peculiar luxuries, the taste for which is confined to a small class. In
the case of food, as those who have already enough do not require more
on account of its cheapness, but rather expend in other things what they
save in food, the increased consumption occasioned by cheapness, carries
off, as experience shows, eonly ae small part of the extra supply caused
by fan abundantf harvest;* and the fall is practically arrested only
when the farmers withdraw their corn, and hold it back in hopes of a
higher price; or by the operations of speculators who buy corn when it
is cheap, and store it up to be brought goutg when more urgently wanted.
Whether the demand and supply are equalized by an increased demand, the
result of cheapness, or by withdrawing a part of the supply, equalized
they are in either case.

Thus we see that the idea of a ratio, as between demand and supply, is
out of place, and has no concern in the matter: the proper mathematical
analogy is that of an equation. Demand and supply, the quantity demanded
and the quantity supplied, will be made equal. If unequal at any moment,
competition equalizes them, and the manner in which this is done is by
an Edition: current; Page: [468] adjustment of the value. If the demand
increases, the value rises; if the demand diminishes, the value falls:
again, if the supply falls off, the value rises; and falls if the supply
is increased. The rise or the fall continues until the demand and supply
are again equal to one another: and the value which a commodity will
bring in any market, is no other than the value which, in that market,
gives a demand just sufficient to carry off the existing or expected
supply.

This, then, is the Law of Value, with respect to all commodities not
susceptible of being multiplied at pleasure. Such commodities, no doubt,
are exceptions. There is another law for that much larger class of
things, which admit of hindefiniteh multiplication. But it is not the
less necessary to conceive distinctly and grasp firmly the theory of
this exceptional case. In the first place, it will be found to be of
great assistance in rendering the more common case intelligible. And in
the next place, the principle of the exception stretches wider, and
embraces more cases, than might at first be supposed.

§ 5. [Miscellaneous cases falling under this law] There are but few
commodities which are naturally and necessarily limited in supply. But
any commodity whatever may be artificially so. Any commodity may be the
subject of a monopoly: like tea, in this country, up to 1834; tobacco in
France, aopium in British India, at present. The price of a monopolized
commodity is commonly supposed to be arbitrary; depending on the will of
the monopolist, and limited only (as in Mr. De Quincey’s case of the
musical box in the wilds of America) by the buyer’s extreme estimate of
its worth to himself. This is in one sense true, but forms no exception,
nevertheless, to the dependence of the value on supply and demand. The
monopolist can fix the value as high as he pleases, short of what the
consumer either could not or would not pay; but he can only do so by
limiting the supply. The Dutch East India Company obtained a monopoly
price for the produce of the Spice Islands, but to do so they were
obliged, in good seasons, to destroy a portion of the crop. Had they
persisted in selling all that they produced, they must have forced a
market by reducing the price, so low, perhaps, that they would have
received for the larger quantity a less total return than for the
smaller: at least they showed that such was their opinion by destroying
the surplus. Even on Lake Superior, Mr. De Quincey’s huckster could not
have sold his box for sixty guineas, if he had possessed two musical
boxes and desired to sell them both. Supposing the cost price of each to
be six guineas, he would have taken seventy for the two in preference to
sixty for one; that is, although his monopoly was the closest possible,
he would have sold the boxes at thirty-five guineas Edition: current;
Page: [469] each, notwithstanding that sixty was not beyond the buyer’s
estimate of the article for his purposes. Monopoly value, therefore,
does not depend on any peculiar principle, but is a mere variety of the
ordinary case of demand and supply.

Again, though there are few commodities which are at all times and for
ever unsusceptible of increase of supply, any commodity whatever may be
temporarily so; and with some commodities this is habitually the case.
Agricultural produce, for example, cannot be increased in quantity
before the next harvest; the quantity of corn already existing in the
world, is all that can be had for sometimes a year to come. During that
interval, corn is practically assimilated to things bof which the
quantityb cannot be increased. In the case of most commodities, it
requires a certain time to increase their quantity; and if the demand
increases, then until a corresponding supply can be brought forward,
that is, until the supply can accommodate itself to the demand, the
value will so rise as to accommodate the demand to the supply.

There is another case, the exact converse of this. There are some
articles of which the supply may be indefinitely increased, but cannot
be rapidly diminished. There are things so durable that the quantity in
existence is at all times very great in comparison with the annual
produce. Gold, and the more durable metals, are things of this sort; and
also houses. The supply of such things might cbe at once diminished by
destroying them; but to do this could only be the interest of the
possessor if he had a monopoly of the article, and could repay himself
for the destruction of a part by the increased value of the remainder.
The value, therefore, of such things may continue for a long time so
low, either from excess of supply or falling off in the demand, as to
put a complete stop to further production; the diminution of supply by
wearing out being so slow a process, that a long time is requisite, even
under a total suspension of production, to restore the original value.
During that interval the value will be regulated solely by supply and
demand, and will rise very gradually as the existing stock wears out,
until there is again a remunerating value, and production resumes its
course.

Finally, there are commodities of which, though capable of being
increased or diminished to a great, and even an unlimited extent, the
value never depends upon anything but demand and supply. This is the
case, in particular, with the commodity Labour; of the value of which we
have treated copiously in the preceding Book: and there are many cases
besides, in which we shall find it necessary to call in this principle
to solve difficult questions of exchange value. This will be
particularly exemplified when we Edition: current; Page: [470] treat of
International Values; that is, of the terms of interchange between
things produced in different countries, or, to speak more generally, in
distant places. But into these questions we cannot enter, until we shall
have examined the case of commodities which can be increased in quantity
indefinitely and at pleasure; and shall have determined by what law,
other than that of Demand and Supply, the permanent or average values of
such commodities are regulated. This we shall do in the next chapter.

Edition: current; Page: [471]


CHAPTER III: Of Cost of Production, in Its Relation to Value

§ 1. [Commodities which are susceptible of indefinite multiplication
without increase of cost. Law of their Value, Cost of Production] When
the production of a commodity is the effect of labour and expenditure,
whether the commodity is susceptible of unlimited multiplication or not,
there is a minimum value which is the essential condition of its being
permanently produced. The value at any particular time is the result of
supply and demand; and is always that which is necessary to create a
market for the existing supply. But unless that value is sufficient to
repay the Cost of Production, and to afford, besides, the ordinary
aexpectationa of profit, the commodity will not continue to be produced.
Capitalists will not go on permanently producing at a loss. They will
not even go on producing at a profit less than they can live on. Persons
whose capital is already embarked, and cannot bbe easilyb extricated,
will persevere for a considerable time without profit, and have been
known to persevere even at a loss, in chopec of better times. But they
will not do so indefinitely, or when there is nothing to indicate that
times are likely to improve. No new capital will be invested in an
employment, unless there be an expectation not only of some profit, but
of a profit as great (regard being had to the degree of eligibility of
the employment in other respects) as can be hoped for in any other
occupation at that time and place. When such profit is evidently not to
be had, if people do not actually withdraw their capital, they at least
abstain from replacing it when consumed. The cost of production,
together with the ordinary profit, may therefore be called the necessary
price, or value, of all things made by labour and capital. Nobody
willingly produces in the prospect of loss. Whoever does so, does it
under a miscalculation, which he corrects as fast as he is able.

When a commodity is not only made by labour and capital, but can be made
by them in indefinite quantity, this Necessary Value, the minimum
Edition: current; Page: [472] with which the producers will be content,
is also, if competition is free dand actived, the maximum which they can
expect. If the value of a commodity is such that it repays the cost of
production not only with the customary, but with a higher rate of
profit, capital rushes to share in this extra gain, and by increasing
the supply of the article, reduces its value. This is not a mere
supposition or surmise, but a fact familiar to those conversant with
commercial operations. Whenever a new line of business presents itself,
offering a hope of unusual profits, and whenever any established trade
or manufacture is believed to be yielding a greater profit than
customary, there is sure to be in a short time so large a production or
importation of the commodity, as not only destroys the extra profit, but
generally goes beyond the mark, and sinks the value as much too low as
it had before been raised too high; until the oversupply is corrected by
a total or partial suspension of further production. As ealready
intimated,* these variations in the quantity produced do not presuppose
or require that any person should change his employment. Those whose
business is thriving, increase their produce by availing themselves more
largely of their credit, while those who are not making the ordinary
profit, restrict their operations, and (in manufacturing phrase) work
short time. In this mode is surely and speedily effected the
equalization, not of profits perhaps, but of the expectations of profit,
in different occupations.

As a general rule, then, things tend to exchange for one another at such
values as will enable each producer to be repaid the cost of production
with the ordinary profit; in other words, such as will give to all
producers the same rate of profit on their outlay. But in order that the
profit may be equal where the outlay, that is, the cost of production,
is equal, things must on the average exchange for one another in the
ratio of their cost of production: things of which the cost of
production is the same, must be of the same value. For only thus will an
equal outlay yield an equal return. If a farmer with a capital equal to
1000 quarters of corn, can produce 1200 quarters, yielding him a profit
of 20 per cent; whatever else can be produced in the same time by a
capital of 1000 quarters, must be worth, that is, must exchange for,
1200 quarters, otherwise the producer would gain either more or less
than 20 per cent.

Adam Smith and Ricardo have called that value of a thing which is
proportional to its cost of production, its Natural Value (or its
Natural Price). They meant by this, the point about which the value
oscillates, and to which it always tends to return; the fcentref value,
towards which, as Edition: current; Page: [473] Adam Smith expresses it,
the market value of a thing is constantly gravitating; and any deviation
from which is but a temporary irregularity, which, the moment it exists,
sets forces in motion tending to correct it. On an average of years
sufficient to enable the oscillations on one side of the central line to
be compensated by those on the other, the market value agrees with the
natural value; but it very seldom coincides exactly with it at any
particular time. The sea everywhere tends to a level; but it never gisg
at an exact level; its surface is always ruffled by waves, and often
agitated by storms. It is enough that no point, at least in the open
sea, is permanently higher than another. Each place is alternately
elevated and depressed; but the ocean preserves its level.

§ 2. [Law of their Value, Cost of Production operating through
potential, but not actual, alterations of supply] The latent influence
by which the values of things are made to conform in the long run to the
cost of production, is the variation that would otherwise take place in
the supply of the commodity. aThea supply would be increased if the
thing continued to sell above the ratio of its cost of production, and
bwould beb diminished if it fell below that ratio. But we must not
therefore suppose it to be necessary that the supply should actually be
either diminished or increased. Suppose that the cost of production of a
thing is cheapened by some mechanical invention, or increased by a tax.
The value of the thing would in a little time, if not immediately, fall
in the one case, and rise in the other; and it would do so, cbecause if
it did not, the supply would in the one case be increased, until the
price fell, in the other diminished, until it rose. For this reason, and
from the erroneous notion that value depends on the proportion between
the demand and the supply, many persons suppose that this proportion
must be altered whenever there is any change in the value of the
commodity; that the value cannot fall through a diminution of the cost
of production, unless the supply is permanently increased; nor rise,
unless the supply is permanently diminished. But this is not the fact:
there is no need that there should be any actual alteration of supply;
and when there is, the alteration, if permanent, is not the cause, but
the consequence of the alteration in value. If, indeed, the supply could
not be increased, no diminution in the cost of production would lower
the value: but there is by no means any necessity that it shouldd. Thed
mere possibility often suffices; the dealers are aware of what ewoulde
happen, and their mutual competition makes them anticipate the result by
lowering the price. Whether fthere Edition: current; Page: [474] will be
a greater permanent supply of the commodity after its production has
been cheapened, depends on quite another question, namely, on whether a
greater quantity is wanted at the reduced value. Most commonly a greater
quantity is wanted, but not necessarily. “A man,” says Mr. De Quincey,*
“buys an article of instant applicability to his own purposes the more
readily and the more largely as it happens to be cheaperg. Silkg
handkerchiefs having fallen to half-price, he will buy, perhaps, in
threefold quantity; but he does not buy more steam-engines because the
price is lowered. His demand for steam-engines is almost always
predetermined by the circumstances of his situation. So far as he
considers the cost at all, it is much more the cost of working this
engine than the cost upon its purchase. But there are many articles for
which the market is absolutely and merely limited by a pre-existing
system, to which those articles are attached as subordinate parts or
members. How could we force the dials or faces of timepieces by
artificial cheapness to sell more plentifully than the inner works or
movements of such timepieces? Could the sale of wine-vaults be increased
without increasing the sale of wine? Or the tools of shipwrights find an
enlarged market whilst shipbuilding was stationary? . . . . Offer to a
town of 3000 inhabitants a stock of hearses, no cheapness will tempt
that town into buying more than one. Offer a stock of yachts, the chief
cost lies in manning, victualling, repairing; no diminution upon the
mere price to a purchaser will tempt into the market any man whose
habits and propensities had not already disposed him to such a purchase.
So of professional costume for bishops, lawyers, students at Oxford.”
Nobody doubts, however, that the price and value of all these things
would be eventually lowered by any diminution of their cost of
production; and lowered through the apprehension entertained of new
competitors, and an increased supply; though the great hazard to which a
new competitor would expose himself, in hanh article not susceptible of
any considerable iextensioni of its market, would enable the established
dealers to maintain their original prices much longer than they could do
in an article offering more encouragement to competition.

Again, reverse the case, and suppose the cost of production increased,
as for example by laying a tax on the commodity. The value would rise;
and that, probably, immediately. Would the supply be diminished? Only if
the increase of value diminished the demand. Whether this effect
followed, would soon appear, and if it did, the value would recede
somewhat, from excess of supply, until the production was reduced, and
jwouldj then rise again. There are many articles for which it requires a
very considerable Edition: current; Page: [475] rise of price,
materially to reduce the demand; in particular, articles of necessity,
such as the habitual food of the people; in England, wheaten bread: of
which there is probably kalmostk as much lconsumedl, at mthe presentm
cost price, as there would be nwith the present populationn at a price
considerably lower. Yet it is especially in such things that dearness or
high price is popularly confounded with scarcity. Food may be dear from
scarcity, as after a bad harvest; but the dearness (for example) which
is the effect of taxation, or of corn laws, has nothing whatever to do
with insufficient supply: such causes do not much diminish the quantity
of food in a country: it is other things rather than food that are
diminished in quantity by them, since, those who pay more for food not
having so much to expend otherwise, the production of other things
contracts itself to the limits of a smaller demand.

It is, therefore, strictly correct to say, that the value of things
which can be increased in quantity at pleasure, does not depend (except
accidentally, and during the time necessary for production to adjust
itself,) upon demand and supply; on the contrary, demand and supply
depend upon it. There is a demand for a certain quantity of the
commodity at its onatural or costo value, and to that the supply in the
long run endeavours to conform. When pat any timep it fails of so
conforming, it is either from miscalculation, or from a change in some
of the elements of the problem: either in the natural value, that is, in
the cost of production; or in the demand, from an alteration in public
taste or in the number or wealth of the consumers. These causes of
disturbance are very liable to occur, and when any one of them does
occur, the market value of the article ceases to agree with the natural
value. The real law of demand and supply, the equation between them,
qstillq holds goodr: if a value different from the natural value be
necessary to make the demand equal to the supply, the market value will
deviate from the natural value; but only for a time; for the permanent
tendency of supply is to conform itself to the demand which is found by
experience to exist for the commodity when selling at its natural value.
If the supply is either more or less than this, it is so accidentally,
and affords either more or less than the ordinary rate of profit; which,
under free sand actives competition, cannot long continue to be the
case.

To recapitulate: demand and supply govern the value of all things which
cannot be indefinitely increased; except that even for them, when
produced by industry, there is a minimum value, determined by the cost
of production. But in all things which admit of indefinite
multiplication, demand and Edition: current; Page: [476] supply only
determine the perturbations of value, during a period which cannot
exceed the length of time necessary for altering the supply. While thus
ruling the oscillations of value, they themselves obey a superior force,
which makes value gravitate towards Cost of Production, and which would
settle it and keep it there, if fresh disturbing influences were not
continually arising to make it again deviate. To pursue the same strain
of metaphor, demand and supply always rush to an equilibrium, but the
condition of stable equilibrium is when things exchange for each other
according to their cost of production, or, in the expression we have
used, when things are at their Natural Value.

Edition: current; Page: [477]


CHAPTER IV: Ultimate Analysis of Cost of Production

§ 1. [Principal element in Cost of Production—Quantity of Labour] The
component elements of Cost of Production have been set forth in the
First Part of this enquiry.* The principal of them, and so much the
principal as to be nearly the sole, we found to be Labour. What the
production of a thing costs to its producer, or its series of producers,
is the labour expended in producing it. If we consider as the producer
the capitalist who makes the advances, the word Labour may be replaced
by the word Wages: what the produce costs to him, is the wages which he
has had to pay. At the first glance indeed this seems to be only a part
of his outlay, since he has not only paid wages to labourers, but has
likewise provided them with tools, materials, and perhaps buildings.
These tools, materials, and buildings, however, were produced by labour
and capital; and their value, like that of the article to the production
of which they are subservient, depends on cost of production, which
again is resolvable into labour. The cost of production of broadcloth
does not wholly consist in the wages of weavers; which alone are
directly paid by the cloth manufacturer. It consists also of the wages
of spinners and woolcombers, and, it may be added, of shepherds, all of
which the clothier has paid for in the price of yarn. It consists too of
the wages of builders and brickmakers, which he has reimbursed in the
contract price of erecting his factory. It partly consists of the wages
of machine-makers, iron-founders, and miners. And to these must be added
the wages of the carriers who transported any of the means and
appliances of the production to the place where they were to be used,
and the product itself to the place where it is to be sold.

The value of commodities, therefore, depends principally (we shall
presently see whether it depends solely) on the quantity of labour
required for their production; including in the idea of production, that
of conveyance to the market. “In estimating,” says Ricardo,† “the
exchangeable value of Edition: current; Page: [478] stockings, for
example, we shall find that their value, comparatively with other
things, depends on the total quantity of labour necessary to manufacture
them and bring them to market. First, there is the labour necessary to
cultivate the land on which the raw cotton is grown; secondly, the
labour of conveying the cotton to the country where the stockings are to
be manufactured, which includes a portion of the labour bestowed in
building the ship in which it is conveyed, and which is charged in the
freight of the goods; thirdly, the labour of the spinner and weaver;
fourthly, a portion of the labour of the engineer, smith, and carpenter,
who erected the buildings and machinery by the help of which they are
made; fifthly, the labour of the retail dealer and of many others, whom
it is unnecessary further to particularize. The aggregate sum of these
various kinds of labour, determines the quantity of other things for
which these stockings will exchange, while the same consideration of the
various quantities of labour which have been bestowed on those other
things, will equally govern the portion of them which will be given for
the stockings.

“To convince ourselves that this is the real foundation of exchangeable
value, let us suppose any improvement to be made in the means of
abridging labour in any one of the various processes through which the
raw cotton must pass before the manufactured stockings come to the
market to be exchanged for other things; and observe the effects which
will follow. If fewer men were required to cultivate the raw cotton, or
if fewer sailors were employed in navigating, or shipwrights in
constructing, the ship in which it was conveyed to us; if fewer hands
were employed in raising the buildings and machinery, or if these, when
raised, were rendered more efficient; the stockings would inevitably
fall in value, and command less of other things. They would fall,
because a less quantity of labour was necessary to their production, and
would therefore exchange for a smaller quantity of those things in which
no such abridgement of labour had been made.

“Economy in the use of labour never fails to reduce the relative value
of a commodity, whether the saving be in the labour necessary to the
manufacture of the commodity itself, or in that necessary to the
formation of the capital, by the aid of which it is produced. In either
case the price of stockings would fall, whether there were fewer men
employed as bleachers, spinners, and weavers, persons immediately
necessary to their manufacture; or as sailors, carriers, engineers, and
smiths, persons more indirectly concerned. In the one case, the whole
saving of labour would fall on the stockings, because that portion of
labour was wholly confined to the stockings; in the other, a portion
only would fall on the stockings, the remainder being applied to all
those other commodities, to the production of which the buildings,
machinery, and carriage, were subservient.”

Edition: current; Page: [479]
§ 2. [Wages not an element in Cost of Production] It will have been
observed that Ricardo expresses himself as if the quantity of labour
which it costs to produce a commodity and bring it to market, were the
only thing on which its value depended. But since the cost of production
to the capitalist is not labour but wages, and since wages may be either
greater or less, the quantity of labour being the same; it would seem
that the value of the product cannot be determined solely by the
quantity of labour, but by the quantity together with the remuneration;
and that values must partly depend on wages.

In order to decide this point, it must be considered, that value is a
relative term: that the value of a commodity is not a name for an
inherent and substantive quality of the thing itself, but means the
quantity of other things which can be obtained in exchange for it. The
value of one thing, must always be understood relatively to some other
thing, or to things in general. Now the relation of one thing to another
cannot be altered by any cause which affects them both alike. A rise or
fall of general wages is a fact which affects all commodities in the
same manner, and therefore affords no reason why they should exchange
for each other in one rather than in another proportion. To suppose that
high wages make high values, is to suppose that there can be such a
thing as general high values. But this is a contradiction in terms: the
high value of some things is synonymous with the low value of others.
The mistake arises from not attending to values, but only to prices.
Though there is no such thing as a general rise of values, there is such
a thing as a general rise of prices. As soon as we form distinctly the
idea of values, we see that high or low wages can have nothing to do
with them; but that high wages make high prices, is a popular and
widely-spread opinion. The whole amount of error involved in this
proposition can only be seen thoroughly when we come to the theory of
money; at present we need only say that if it be true, there can be no
such thing as a real rise of wages; for if wages could not rise without
a proportional rise of the price of everything, they could not, for any
substantial purpose, rise at all. This surely is a sufficient reductio
ad absurdum, and shows the amazing folly of the propositions which may
and do become, and long remain, accredited doctrines of popular
political economy. It must be remembered too that general high prices,
even supposing them to exist, can be of no use to a producer or dealer,
considered as such; for if they increase his money returns, they
increase in the same degree all his expenses. There is no mode in which
capitalists can compensate themselves for a high cost of labour, through
any action on values or prices. It cannot be prevented from taking its
effect aona low profits. If the labourers really Edition: current; Page:
[480] get more, that is, get the produce of more labour, a smaller
percentage must remain for profit. From this Law of Distribution,
resting as it does on a law of arithmetic, there is no escape. The
mechanism of Exchange and Price may hide it from us, but is quite
powerless to alter it.

§ 3. [Wages not an element in Cost of Production except in so far as
they vary from employment to employment] Although, however, general
wages, whether high or low, do not affect values, yet if wages are
higher in one employment than aanother, or if they rise bandb fall
permanently in one employment without doing so in others, these
inequalities do really operate upon values. The causes which make wages
vary from one employment to another, have been considered in a former
chapter. When the wages of an employment permanently exceed the average
rate, the value of the thing produced will, in the same degree, exceed
the standard determined by mere quantity of labour. Things, for example,
which are made by skilled labour, exchange for the produce of a much
greater quantity of unskilled labour; for no reason but because the
labour is more highly paid. If, through the extension of education, the
labourers competent to skilled employments were so increased in number
as to diminish the difference between their wages and those of common
labour, all things produced by labour of the superior kind would fall in
value, compared with things produced by common labour, and these might
be said therefore to rise in value. We have before remarked that the
difficulty of passing from one class of employments to a class greatly
superior, has hitherto caused the wages of all those classes of
labourers who are separated from one another by any very marked barrier,
to depend more than might be supposed upon the increase of the
population of each class considered separately; and that the
inequalities in the remuneration of labour care much greater than could
exist if the competition of the labouring people generally could be
brought practically to bear on each particular employment. It follows
from this that wages in different employments do not rise or fall
simultaneously, but are, for short and sometimes even for long periods,
nearly independent of one another. All such disparities evidently alter
the relative costs of production of different commodities, and will
therefore be completely represented in their natural or average value.

It thus appears that the maxim laid down by some of the best political
economists, that wages do not enter into value, is expressed with
greater latitude than the truth warrants, or than accords with their own
meaning. Edition: current; Page: [481] Wages do enter into value. The
relative wages of the labour necessary for producing different
commodities, daffectd their value just as much as the relative
quantities of labour. It is true, the absolute wages paid have no effect
upon values; but neither has the absolute quantity of labour. If that
were to vary simultaneously and equally in all commodities, values would
not be affected. If, for instance, the general efficiency of all labour
were increased, so that all things without exception could be produced
in the same quantity as before with a smaller amount of labour, no trace
of this general diminution of cost of production would show itself in
the values of commoditiese. Anye change which might take place in them
would only represent the unequal degrees in which the improvement
affected different things; and would consist in cheapening those in
which the saving of labour had been the greatest, while those in which
there had been some, but a less saving of labour, would actually rise in
value. In strictness, therefore, wages of labour have as much to do with
value as quantity of labour: and neither Ricardo nor any one else has
denied the fact. In considering, however, the causes of variations in
value, quantity of labour is the thing of chief importance; for when
that varies, it is generally in one or a few commodities at a time, but
the variations of wages (except passing fluctuations) are usually
general, and have no considerable effect on fvaluef.

§ 4. [Profits an element in Cost of Production, in so far as they vary
from employment to employment] Thus far of labour, or wages, as an
element in cost of production. But in our analysis, in the First Book,
of the requisites of production, we found that there is another
necessary element in it besides labour. There is also capital; and this
being the result of abstinence, the produce, or its value, must be
sufficient to remunerate, not only all the labour required, but the
abstinence of all the persons by whom the remuneration of the different
classes of labourers was advanced. The return for abstinence is Profit.
And profit, we have also seen, is not exclusively the surplus remaining
to the capitalist after he has been compensated for his outlay, but
forms, in most cases, no unimportant part of the outlay itself. The
flax-spinner, part of whose expenses consists of the purchase of flax
and of machinery, has had to pay, in their price, not only the wages of
the labour by which the flax was grown and the machinery made, but the
profits of the grower, the flax-dresser, the miner, the iron-founder,
and the machine-maker. All these profits, together with those of the
spinner himself, were again advanced by the weaver, in the price of his
material, linen yarn: and along with them the profits of a fresh set of
Edition: current; Page: [482] machine-makers, and aofa the miners and
iron-workers who supplied them with their metallic material. All these
advances form part of the cost of production of linen. Profits,
therefore, as well as wages, enter into the cost of production which
determines the value of the produce.

Value, however, being purely relative, cannot depend upon absolute
profits, no more than upon absolute wages, but upon relative profits
only. High general profits cannot, any more than high general wages, be
a cause of high values, because high general values are an absurdity and
a contradiction. In so far as profits enter into the cost of production
of all things, they cannot affect the value of any. It is only by
entering in a greater degree into the cost of production of some things
than of others, that they can have any influence on value.

For example, we have seen that there are causes which necessitate a
permanently higher rate of profit in certain employments than in others.
There must be a compensation for superior risk, trouble, and
disagreeableness. This can only be obtained by selling the commodity at
a value above that which is due to the quantity of labour necessary for
its production. If gunpowder exchanged for other things in no higher
ratio than that of the labour required from first to last for producing
it, no one would set up a powder-mill. Butchers are certainly a more
prosperous class than bakers, and do not seem to be exposed to greater
risks, since it is not remarked that they are oftener bankrupts. They
seem, therefore, to obtain higher profits, which can only arise from the
more limited competition caused by the unpleasantness, and to a certain
degree, the unpopularity, of their trade. But this higher profit implies
that they sell btheir commodityb at a higher value than that due to
their labour and outlay. All inequalities of profit which are necessary
and permanent, are represented in the relative values of the
commodities.

§ 5. [Profits an element in Cost of Production, in so far as they are
spread over unequal lengths of time] Profits, however, may enter more
largely into the conditions of production of one commodity than of
another, even though there be no difference in the rate of profit
between the two employments. The one commodity may be called upon to
yield profit during a longer period of time than the other. The example
by which this case is usually illustrated is that of wine. Suppose a
quantity of wine, and a quantity of cloth, made by equal amounts of
labour, and that labour paid at the same rate. The cloth does not
improve by keeping; the wine does. Suppose that, to attain the desired
quality, the wine requires to be kept five years. The producer or dealer
will not keep it, unless at the end of five years he Edition: current;
Page: [483] can sell it for as much more than the cloth, as amounts to
five years’ profit, accumulated at compound interest. The wine and the
cloth were made by the same original outlay. Here then is a case in
which the natural values, relatively to one another, of two commodities,
do not conform to their cost of production alone, but to their cost of
production plus something else. Unless, indeed, for the sake of
generality in the expression, we include the profit which the
wine-merchant foregoes during the five years, in the cost of production
of the wine: looking upon it as a kind of additional outlay, over and
above his other advances, for which outlay he must be indemnified at
last.

All commodities made by machinery are assimilated, at least
approximately, to the wine in the preceding example. aIn comparisona
with things made wholly by immediate labour, profits enter more largely
into their cost of production. Suppose two commodities, A and B, each
requiring a year for its production, by means of a capital which we will
on this occasion denote by money, and suppose to be 1000l. A is made
wholly by immediate labour, the whole 1000l. being expended directly in
wages. B is made by means of labour which bcostsb 500l. and a machine
which cost 500l., and the machine is worn out by one year’s use. The two
commodities will be exactly of the same value; which, if computed in
money, and if profits are 20 per cent per annum, will be 1200l. But of
this 1200l., in the case of A, only 200l., or one-sixth, is profit:
while in the case of B there is not only the 200l., but as much of 500l.
(the price of the machine) as consisted of the profits of the
machine-maker; which, if we suppose the machine also to have taken a
year for its production, is again one-sixth. So that in the case of A
only one-sixth of the entire return is profit, whilst in B the element
of profit comprises not only a sixth of the whole, but an additional
sixth of a large part.

The greater the proportion of the whole capital which consists of
machinery, or buildings, or material, or anything else which must be
provided before the immediate labour can commence, the more largely will
profits enter into the cost of production. It is equally true, though
not so obvious at first sight, that greater durability in the portion of
capital which consists of machinery or buildings, has precisely the same
effect as a greater amount of it. As we just supposed one extreme case,
cof a machine entirely worn out by a year’s use, let us now suppose the
opposite and still more extreme case of a machine which lasts for ever,
and requires no repairs. In this case, which is as well suited for dthe
purposed of illustration as if it were a possible one, it will be
unnecessary that the manufacturer should ever be repaid the 500l. which
he gave for the machine, since he has always the Edition: current; Page:
[484] machine itself, worth 500l.; but he must be paid, as before, a
profit on it. The commodity B, therefore, which in the case previously
supposed was sold for 1200l. of which esume 1000l. were to replace the
capital and 200l. were profit, can now be sold for 700l., being 500l. to
replace wages, and 200l. profit on the entire capital. Profit,
therefore, enters into the value of B in the ratio of 200l. out of
700l., being two-sevenths of the whole, or 284/7 per cent, while in the
case of A, as before, it enters only in the ratio of one-sixth, or 16⅔
per cent. The case is of course purely ideal, since no machinery or
other fixed capital lasts for ever; but the more durable it is, the
nearer it approaches to this ideal case, and the more largely does
profit enter into the return. If, for instance, a machine worth 500l.
loses one-fifth of its value by each year’s use, 100l. must be added to
the return to make up this loss, and the price of the commodity will be
800l. Profit therefore will enter into it in the ratio of 200l. to
800l., or one-fourth, which is still a much higher proportion than
one-sixth, or 200l. in 1200l., as in case A.

From the unequal proportion in which, in different employments, profits
enter into the advances of the capitalist, and therefore into the
returns required by him, two consequences follow in regard to value. One
is, that commodities do not exchange in the ratio simply of the
quantities of labour required to produce them; not even if we allow for
the unequal rates at which fdifferent kinds of labour are permanently
remunerated. We have already illustrated this gby the example of wine:
we shall now further exemplify it by the case of commodities made by
machinery. Suppose, as before, an article A made by a thousand pounds’
worth of immediate labour. But instead of B, made by 500l. worth of
immediate labour and a machine worth 500l., let us suppose C, made by
500l. worth of immediate labour with the aid of a machine which has been
produced by another 500l. worth of immediate labour: the machine
requiring a year for making, and worn out by a year’s use; profits being
as before 20 per cent. A and C are made by equal quantities of labour,
paid at the same rate: A costs 1000l. worth of direct labour; C, only
500l. worth, which however is made up to 1000l. by the labour expended
in the construction of the machine. If labour, or its remuneration, were
the sole ingredient of cost of production, these two things would
exchange for one another. But will they do so? Certainly not. The
machine having been made in a year by an outlay of 500l., and profits
being 20 per cent, the natural price of the machine is 600l.: making an
additional 100l. which must be advanced, over and above his other
expenses, by the manufacturer of C, and repaid to him with a profit of
20 per cent. While, therefore, the commodity A is sold for 1200l., C
cannot be permanently sold for less than 1320l.

Edition: current; Page: [485]
A second consequence is, that every rise or fall of general profits will
have an effect on values. Not indeed by raising or lowering them
generally, (which, as we have so often said, is a contradiction and an
impossibility): but by altering the proportion in which the values of
things are affected by the unequal lengths of time for which profit is
due. When two things, though made by equal labour, are of unequal value
because the one is called upon to yield profit for a greater number of
years or months than the other; this difference of value will be greater
when profits are greater, and less when they are less. The wine which
has to yield five years’ profit more than the cloth, will surpass it in
value much more if profits are 40 per cent, than if they are only 20.
The commodities A and C, which, though made by equal quantities of
labour, were sold for 1200l. and 1320l., a difference of 10 per cent,
would, if profits had been only half as much, have been sold for 1100l.
and 1155l., a difference of only 5 per cent.

It follows from this, that even a general rise of wages, when it
involves a real increase in the cost of labour, does in some degree
influence values. It does not affect them in the manner vulgarly
supposed, by raising them universally. But an increase hinh the cost of
labour, lowers profits; and therefore lowers in natural value the things
into which profits enter in a greater proportion than the average, and
raises those into which they enter in a less proportion than the
average. All commodities in the production of which machinery bears a
large part, especially if the machinery is very durable, are lowered in
their relative value when profits fall; or, what is equivalent, other
things are raised in value relatively to them. This truth is sometimes
expressed in a phraseology more plausible than sound, by saying that a
rise of wages raises the ivaluei of things made by labour, in comparison
with those made by machinery. But things made by machinery, just as much
as any other things, are made by labour, namely, the labour which made
the machinery itself: the only difference being that profits enter
somewhat more largely into the production of things for which machinery
is used, though the principal item of the outlay is still labour. It is
better, therefore, to associate the effect with fall of profits than
with rise of wages; especially as this last expression is extremely
ambiguous, suggesting the idea of an increase of the labourer’s real
remuneration, rather than of what is alone to the purpose here, namely,
the cost of labour to its employer.

§ 6. [Occasional elements in Cost of Production: taxes, and scarcity
value of materials] Besides the natural and necessary elements in cost
of production—labour and profits—there are others which are artificial
and Edition: current; Page: [486] casual, as for instance a tax. The
atax on malt isa as much a part of the cost of production of bthat
articleb as the wages of the labourers. The expenses which the law
imposes, as well as those which the nature of things imposes, must be
reimbursed with the ordinary profit from the value of the produce, or
the things will not continue to be produced. But the influence of
taxation on cvaluec is subject to the same conditions as the influence
of wages and of profits. It is not general taxation, but differential
taxation, that produces the effect. If all productions were taxed dso as
to take an equal percentage from all profitsd, relative values would be
in no way disturbed. If only a few commodities were taxed, their value
would rise: and if only a few were left untaxed, their value would fall.
If half were taxed and the remainder untaxed, the first half would rise
and the last would fall relatively to each other. This would be
necessary ein ordere to equalize the expectation of profit in all
employments, without which the taxed employments would ultimately, if
not immediately, be abandoned. But general taxation, when equally
imposed, and not disturbing the frelationsf of different productions to
one another, cannot produce any effect on values.

We have thus far supposed that all the means and appliances which enter
into the cost of production of commodities, are things whose own value
depends on their cost of production. Some of them, however, may belong
to the class of things which cannot be increased ad libitum in quantity,
and which therefore, if the demand goes beyond a certain amount, command
a scarcity value. The materials of many of the ornamental articles
manufactured in Italy are the substances called rosso, giallo, and verde
antico, which, whether truly or falsely I know not, are asserted to be
solely derived from the destruction of ancient columns and other
ornamental structures; the quarries from which the stone was originally
cut being exhausted, or their locality forgotten.* A material of such a
nature, if in much demand, must be at a scarcity value; and this value
enters into the cost of production, and consequently into the value, of
the finished article. The time seems to be approaching when the more
valuable furs will come under the influence of a scarcity value of the
material. Hitherto the diminishing number of the animals which produce
them, in the wildernesses of Siberia, and on the coasts of the Esquimaux
Sea, has operated on the value only through the greater labour which has
become necessary for securing any given quantity of the article, since,
without doubt, by employing Edition: current; Page: [487] labour enough,
it might still be obtained in much greater abundance for some time
longer.

But the case in which scarcity value chiefly operates in adding to cost
of production, is the case of natural agents. These, when
unappropriated, and to be had for the taking, do not enter into cost of
production, save to the extent of the labour which may be necessary to
fit them for use. Even when appropriated, they do not (as we have
already seen) bear a value from the mere fact of the appropriation, but
only from scarcity, that is, from limitation of supply. But it is
equally certain that they often do bear a scarcity value. Suppose a fall
of water, in a place where there are more mills wanted than there is
water-power to supply gthemg, the use of the fall of water will have a
scarcity value, sufficient either to bring the demand down to the
supply, or to pay for the creation of an artificial power, by steam or
otherwise, equal in efficiency to the water-power.

A natural agent being a possession in perpetuity, and being only
serviceable by the products resulting from its continued employment, the
ordinary mode of deriving benefit from its ownership is by an annual
equivalent, paid by the person who uses it, from the proceeds of its
use. This equivalent always might be, and generally is, termed rent. The
question, therefore, respecting the influence which the appropriation of
natural agents produces on values, is often stated in this form: Does
Rent enter into Cost of Production? and the answer of the best political
economists is in the negative. The temptation is strong to the adoption
of these sweeping expressions, even by those who are aware of the
restrictions with which they must be taken; for there is no denying that
they stamp a hgeneralh principle more firmly ioni the mind, than if it
were hedged round in theory with all its practical limitations. But they
also puzzle and mislead, and create an impression unfavourable to
political economy, as if it disregarded the evidence of facts. jNo onej
can deny that rent sometimes enters into cost of kproduction.k If I buy
or rent a piece of ground, and build a cloth manufactory on it, lthe
ground-rent formsl legitimately a part of my expenses of production,
which must be repaid by the mproduct.m And since all factories are built
on ground, and most of them in places where ground is peculiarly
valuable, the rent paid for it must, on the average, be compensated in
the values of all things made in factories. In what sense it is true
that rent does not enter into the cost of production or affect the value
of agricultural produce, will be shown in the succeeding chapter.

Edition: current; Page: [488]


CHAPTER V: Of Rent, in Its Relation to Value

§ 1. [Commodities which are susceptible of indefinite multiplication,
but not without increase of cost. Law of their Value is Cost of
Production in the most unfavourable existing circumstances] We have
investigated the laws which determine the value of two classes of
commodities: the small class which, being limited to a definite
quantity, have their value entirely determined by demand and supply,
save that their cost of production (if they have any) constitutes a
minimum below which they cannot permanently fall; and the large class,
which can be multiplied ad libitum by labour and capital, and of which
the cost of production fixes the maximum as well as the minimum at which
they can permanently exchange. But there is still a third kind of
commodities ato be considered:a those which have, not one, but several
costs of production: which can always be increased in quantity by labour
and capital, but not by the same amount of labour and capital; of which
so much may be produced at a given cost, but a further quantity not
without a greater cost. These commodities form an intermediate class,
partaking of the character of both the others. The principal of them is
agricultural produce. We have already made abundant reference to the
fundamental truth, that in agriculture, the state of the art being
given, doubling the labour does not double the produce; that if an
increased quantity of produce is required, the additional supply is
obtained at a greater cost than the first. Where a hundred quarters of
corn are all that is at present required from the lands of a given
village, if the growth of population made it necessary to raise a
hundred more, either by breaking up worse land now uncultivated, or by a
more elaborate cultivation of the land already under the plough, the
additional hundred, or some part of them at least, might cost double or
treble as much per quarter as the former supply.

If the first hundred quarters were all raised at the same expense (only
the best land being cultivated); and bifb that expense would be
remunerated Edition: current; Page: [489] with the ordinary profit by a
price of 20s. the quarter; the natural price of wheat, so long as no
more than that quantity was required, would be 20s.; and it could only
rise above, or fall below that price, from vicissitudes of seasons, or
other casual variations in supply. But if the population of the district
advanced, a time would arrive when more than a hundred quarters would be
necessary to feed it. We must suppose that there is no access to any
foreign supply. By the hypothesis, no more than a hundred quarters can
be produced in the district, unless by either bringing worse land into
cultivation, or altering the system of culture to a more expensive one.
Neither of these things will be done without a rise cinc price. dThisd
rise of price will gradually be brought about by the increasing demand.
So long as the price has risen, but not risen enough to repay with the
ordinary profit the cost of producing an additional quantity, the
increased value of the limited supply partakes of the nature of a
scarcity value. Suppose that it will not answer to cultivate the second
best land, or land of the second degree of remoteness, for a less return
than 25s. the quarter; and that this price is also necessary to
remunerate the expensive operations by which an increased produce might
be raised from land of the first quality. If so, the price will rise,
through the increased demand, until it reaches 25s. That will now be the
natural price; being the price without which the quantity, for which
society has a demand at that price, will not be produced. At that price,
however, society can go on for some time longer; could go on perhaps for
ever, if population did not increase. The price, having attained that
point, will not again permanently recede (though it may fall temporarily
from accidental abundance); nor will it advance further, so long as
society can obtain the supply it requires without a second increase of
the cost of production.

I have made use of Price in this reasoning, as a convenient symbol of
Value, from the greater familiarity of the idea; and I shall continue to
do so as far eas may appeare to be necessary.

In the case supposed, different portions of the supply of corn have
different costs of production. Though the 20, or 50, or 150 quarters
additional have been produced at a cost proportional to 25s., the
original hundred quarters per annum are still produced at a cost only
proportional to 20s. This is self-evident, if the original and the
additional supply are produced on different qualities of land. It is
equally true if they are produced on the same land. Suppose that land of
the best quality, which produced 100 quarters at 20s., has been made to
produce 150 by an expensive process, which it would not answer to
undertake without a price of 25s. The cost which requires 25s. is
incurred for the sake of 50 quarters alone: the first hundred might have
continued for ever to be produced at Edition: current; Page: [490] the
original cost, and with the benefit, on that quantity, of the whole rise
of price caused by the fincreasedf demand: no one, therefore, will incur
the additional expense for the sake of the additional fifty, unless they
alone will pay for the whole of it. The fifty, therefore, will be
produced at their natural price, proportioned to the cost of their
production; while the other hundred will now bring in 5s. a quarter more
than their natural price—than the price corresponding to, and sufficing
to remunerate, their lower cost of production.

If the production of any, even the smallest, portion of the supply,
requires as a necessary condition a certain price, that price will be
obtained for all the rest. We are not able to buy one loaf cheaper than
another because the corn from which it was made, being grown on a richer
soil, has cost less to the grower. The value, therefore, of an article
(meaning its natural, which is the same with its average value) is
determined by the cost of that portion of the supply which is produced
and brought to market at the greatest expense. This is the Law of Value
of the third of the three classes into which all commodities are
divided.

§ 2. [Such commodities, when produced in circumstances more favourable,
yield a rent equal to the difference of cost] If the portion of produce
raised in the most unfavourable circumstances, obtains a value
proportioned to its cost of production; all the portions raised in more
favourable circumstances, selling as they must do at the same value,
obtain a value more than proportioned to their cost of production. Their
value is not, correctly speaking, a scarcity value, for it is determined
by the circumstances of the production of the commodity, and not by the
degree of dearness necessary for keeping down the demand to the level of
a limited supply. The owners, however, of those portions of the produce
enjoy a privilege; they obtain a value which yields them more than the
ordinary profit. If this advantage depends upon any special exemption,
such as being free from a tax, or upon any personal advantages, physical
or mental, or any peculiar process only known to themselves, or upon the
possession of a greater capital than other people, or upon various other
things which might be enumerated, they retain it to themselves as an
extra gain, over and above the general profits of capital, of the
nature, in some sort, of a monopoly profit. But when, as in the case
which we are more particularly considering, the advantage depends on the
possession of a natural agent of peculiar quality, as for instance of
more fertile land than that which determines the general value of the
commodity; and when this natural agent is not owned by themselves; the
person who does own it, is able to exact from them, in the form of rent,
the whole extra gain derived from its use. We are thus brought by
another Edition: current; Page: [491] road to the Law of Rent,
investigated in the concluding chapter of the Second Book. Rent, we
again see, is the difference between the unequal returns to different
parts of the capital employed on the soil. Whatever surplus any portion
of agricultural capital produces, beyond what is produced by the same
amount of capital on the worst soil, or under the most expensive mode of
cultivation, which the existing demands of society compel a recourse to;
that surplus will naturally be paid as rent from that capital, to the
owner of the land on which it is employed.

It was long thought by political economists, among the rest even by Adam
Smith, that the produce of land is always at a monopoly value, because
(they said) in addition to the ordinary rate of profit, it always yields
something afurthera for rent. This we now see to be erroneous. A thing
cannot be at a monopoly value, bwhen its supplyb can be increased to an
indefinite extent if we are only willing to incur the cost. If no more
corn than the existing quantity is grown, it is because the value has
not risen high enough to remunerate any one for growing it. Any land
c(not reserved for other uses, or for pleasure)c which at the existing
price, and by the existing processes, will yield the ordinary profit, is
tolerably certain, unless some artificial hindrance intervenes, to be
cultivated, although nothing may be left for rent. As long as there is
any land fit for cultivation, which at the existing price cannot be
profitably cultivated at all, there must be some land a little better,
which will yield the ordinary profit, but allow nothing for rent: and
that land, if within the boundary of a farm, will be cultivated by the
farmer; if not so, probably by the proprietor, or by some other person
on sufferance. Some such land at least, under cultivation, there can
scarcely fail to be.

Rent, therefore, forms no part of the cost of production which
determines the value of agricultural produce. Circumstances no doubt may
be conceived in which it might do so, and very largely too. We can
imagine a country so fully peopled, and with all its cultivable soil so
completely occupied, that to produce any additional quantity would
require more labour than the produce would feed: and if we suppose this
to be the condition of the whole world, or of a country debarred from
foreign supply, then, if population continued increasing, both the land
and its produce would really rise to a monopoly or scarcity price. But
this state of things never can have really existed anywhere, unless
possibly in some small island cut off from the rest of the world; nor is
there any danger whatever that it should exist. It certainly exists in
no known region at present. Monopoly, we have seen, can take effect on
value, only through limitation of supply. In all countries of any extent
there is more cultivable land than is yet cultivated; and while there is
any such surplus, it is the same thing, Edition: current; Page: [492] so
far as that quality of land is concerned, as if there were an infinite
quantity. What is practically limited in supply is only the better
qualities; and even for those, so much rent cannot be demanded as would
bring in the competition of the lands not yet in cultivation; the rent
of a piece of land must be somewhat less than the whole excess of its
productiveness over that of the best land which it is not yet profitable
to cultivate; that is, it must be about equal to the excess above the
worst land which it disd profitable to cultivate. The land or the
capital most unfavourably circumstanced among those actually employed,
pays no rent; and that land or capital determines the cost of production
which regulates the value of the whole produce. eThuse rent is, as we
have already seen, no cause of value, but the price of the privilege
which the inequality of the returns to different portions of
agricultural produce confers on all except the least favoured
fportionsf.

Rent, in short, merely equalizes the profits of different farming
capitals, by enabling the landlord to appropriate all extra gains
occasioned by superiority of natural advantages. If all landlords were
unanimously to forego their rent, they would but transfer it to the
farmers, without benefiting the consumer; for the existing price of corn
would still be an indispensable condition of the production of part of
the existing supply, and gif a part obtained that price the whole would
obtaing it. Rent, therefore, unless artificially increased by
restrictive laws, is no burthen on the consumer: it does not raise the
price of corn, and is no otherwise a detriment to the public, than
inasmuch as if the state had retained it, or imposed an equivalent in
the shape of a land-tax, it would then have been a fund applicable to
general instead of private advantage.

§ 3. [Rent of mines and fisheries, and ground-rent of buildings]
Agricultural productions are not the only commodities which have several
different costs of production at once, and which, in consequence of that
difference, and in proportion to it, afford a rent. Mines are also an
instance. Almost all kinds of raw material extracted from the interior
of the earth—ametala, coals, precious stones, &c., are obtained from
mines differing considerably in fertility, that is, yielding very
different quantities of the product to the same quantity of labour and
capital. This being the case, it is an obvious question, why bare not
the most fertile minesb so worked as to supply the whole cmarket?c No
such question can arise as to land; Edition: current; Page: [493] it
being self-evident, that the most fertile lands could not possibly be
made to supply the whole demand of a fully-peopled country; and even of
what they do yield, a part is extorted from them by a labour and outlay
as great as that required to grow the same amount on worse land. But it
is not so with mines; at least, not universally. There are, perhaps,
cases in which it is impossible to extract from a particular vein, in a
given time, more than a certain quantity of ore, because there is only a
limited surface of the vein exposed, on which more than a certain number
of labourers cannot be simultaneously employed. But this is not true of
all mines. In collieries, for example, some other cause of limitation
must be sought for. In some instances the owners limit the quantity
raised, in order not too rapidly to exhaust the mine: in others there
are said to be combinations of owners, to keep up a monopoly price by
limiting the production. Whatever be the causes, it is a fact that
dmines of different degrees of richness are in operationd, and since the
value of the produce must be proportional to the cost of production at
the worst mine (fertility and situation taken together), it is more than
proportional to that of the best. All mines superior in produce to the
worst actually worked, will yield, therefore, a rent equal to the
excess. They may yield more; and the worst mine may itself yield a rent.
Mines being comparatively few, their qualities do not graduate gently
into one another, as the qualities of land do; and the demand may be
such as to keep the value of the produce considerably above the cost of
production at the worst mine now worked, without being sufficient to
bring into operation a still worse. During the interval, the produce is
really at a scarcity value.

Fisheries are another example. Fisheries in the open sea are not
appropriated, but fisheries in lakes or rivers almost always are so, and
likewise oyster-beds or other particular fishing grounds on coasts. We
may take salmon fisheries as an example of the whole class. Some rivers
are far more productive in salmon than others. None, however, without
being exhausted, can supply more than a very limited demand. The demand
of a country like England can only be supplied by taking salmon from
many different rivers of unequal productiveness, and the value must be
sufficient to repay the cost of obtaining the fish from the least
productive of these. All others, therefore, will if appropriated afford
a rent equal to the value of their superiority. Much higher than this it
cannot be, if there are salmon rivers accessible which from distance or
inferior productiveness have not yet contributed to supply the market.
If there are not, the value, doubtless, may rise to a scarcity rate, and
the worst fisheries in use may then yield a considerable rent.

Both in the case of mines and of fisheries, the natural order of events
is Edition: current; Page: [494] liable to be interrupted by the opening
of a new mine, or a new fishery, of superior quality to some of those
already in use. The first effect of such an incident is an increase of
the supply; which of course lowers the value to call forth an increased
demand. This reduced value may be no longer sufficient to remunerate the
worst of the existing mines or fisheries, and these may consequently be
abandoned. If the superior mines or fisheries, with the addition of the
one newly opened, produce as much of the commodity as is required eat
the lower value corresponding to their lower cost of production, the
fall of value will be permanent, and there will be a corresponding fall
in the rents of those mines or fisheries which are not abandoned. In
this case, when things have permanently adjusted themselves, the result
will be, that the scale of qualities which supply the market will have
been cut short at the lower end, while a new insertion will have been
made in the scale at some point higher up; and the worst mine or fishery
in use—the one which regulates the rents of the superior qualities and
the value of the commodity—will be a mine or fishery of better quality
than that by which they were previously regulated.

Land is used for other purposes than agriculture, especially for
residence; and when so used, yields a rent, determined by principles
similar to those already laid down. The ground rent of a building, and
the rent of a garden or park attached to it, fwill notf be less than the
rent which the same land would afford in agriculture: but gmay be
greater than this to an indefinite amount; the surplus being either in
consideration of beauty or of convenience, the convenience often
consisting in superior facilities for pecuniary gain. Sites of
remarkable beauty are generally limited in supply, and therefore, if in
great demand, are at a scarcity hvalue. Sites superior only in
convenience are governed as to their value by the ordinary principles of
rent. The ground rent of a house in a small village is but little higher
than the rent of a similar patch of ground in the open fields: but that
of a shop in Cheapside will exceed these, by the whole amount at which
people estimate the superior facilities of money-making in the more
crowded place. The rents of wharfage, dock and harbour room,
water-power, and many other privileges, may be analysed on similar
principles.

§ 4. [Cases of extra profit analogous to rent] Cases of extra profit
analogous to rent, are more frequent in the transactions of industry
than is sometimes supposed. Take the case, for example, of a patent, or
exclusive privilege for the use of a process by which cost of production
is lessened. If the value of the product continues to be regulated by
what it costs to those who are obliged to persist in the old process,
the patentee will make an Edition: current; Page: [495] extra profit
equal to the advantage which his process possesses over theirs. This
extra profit is essentially similar to rent, and sometimes even assumes
the form of it; the patentee allowing to other producers the use of his
privilege, in consideration of an annual payment. So long as he, and
those whom he associates in the privilege, do not produce enough to
supply the whole market, so long the original cost of production, being
the necessary condition of producing a part, will regulate the value of
the whole; and the patentee will be enabled to keep up his rent to a
full equivalent for the advantage which his process gives him. In the
commencement indeed he will probably forego a part of this advantage for
the sake of underselling others: the increased supply which he brings
forward will lower the value, and make the trade a bad one for those who
do not share in the privilege: many of whom therefore will gradually
retire, or restrict their operations, or enter into arrangements with
the patentee: as his supply increases theirs will diminish, the value
meanwhile continuing slightly depressed. But if he stops short in his
operations before the market is wholly supplied by the new process,
things will again adjust themselves to what was the natural value before
the invention was made, and the benefit of the improvement will accrue
solely to the patentee.

The extra gains which any producer or dealer obtains through superior
talents for business, or superior business arrangements, are very much
of a similar kind. If all his competitors had the same advantages, and
used them, the benefit would be transferred to their customers, through
the diminished value of the article: he only retains it for himself
because he is able to bring his commodity to market at a lower cost,
while its value is determined by a higher. All advantages, in fact,
which one competitor has over another, whether natural or acquired,
whether personal or the result of social arrangements, bring the
commodity, so far, into athea Third Class, and assimilate the possessor
of the advantage to a receiver of rent. Wages and profits represent the
universal elements in production, while rent may be taken to represent
the differential and peculiar: any difference in favour of certain
producers, or bin favour of production inb certain circumstances, being
the source of a gain, which, though not called rent unless paid
periodically by one person to another, is governed by laws entirely the
same with it. The price paid for a differential advantage in producing a
commodity, cannot enter into the general cost of production of the
commodity.

A commodity may no doubt, in some contingencies, yield a rent even under
the most disadvantageous circumstances of its production: but only when
it is, for the time, in the condition of those commodities which are
absolutely limited in supply, and is therefore selling at a scarcity
value; Edition: current; Page: [496] which never is, nor has been, nor
can be, a permanent condition of any of the great rent-yielding
commodities: unless through their approaching exhaustion, if they are
mineral products (coal for example), or through an increase of
population, continuing after a further increase of production becomes
impossible: ca contingency,c which the almost inevitable progress of
human culture and improvement in the long interval which has first to
elapse, forbids us to consider as probable.

Edition: current; Page: [497]


CHAPTER VI: Summary of the Theory of Value

§ 1. [The theory of Value recapitulated in a series of propositions] We
have now attained a favourable point for looking back, and taking a
simultaneous view of the space which we have traversed since the
commencement of the present Book. The following are the principles of
the theory of Value, so far as we have yet ascertained them.

I. Value is a relative term. The value of a thing means the quantity of
some other thing, or of things in general, which it exchanges for. The
values of all things can never, therefore, rise or fall simultaneously.
There is no such thing as a general rise or a general fall of values.
Every rise of value supposes a fall, and every fall a rise.

II. The temporary or market value of a thing, depends on the demand and
supply; rising as the demand rises, and falling as the supply rises. The
demand, however, varies with the value, being generally greater when the
thing is cheap than when it is dear; and the value always adjusts itself
in such a manner, that the demand is equal to the supply.

III. Besides their temporary value, things have also a permanent, or as
it may be called, a Natural Value, to which the market value, after
every variation, always tends to return; and the oscillations compensate
for one another, so that, on the average, commodities exchange at about
their natural value.

IV. The natural value of some things is a scarcity value; but most
things naturally exchange for one another in the ratio of their cost of
production, or at what may be termed their Cost Value.

V. The things which are naturally and permanently at a scarcity value,
are those of which the supply cannot be increased at all, or not
sufficiently to satisfy the whole of the demand which would exist for
them at their cost value.

VI. A monopoly value means a scarcity value. Monopoly cannot give a
value to anything except through a limitation of the supply.

VII. Every commodity of which the supply can be indefinitely increased
by labour and capital, exchanges for other things proportionally to the
Edition: current; Page: [498] cost necessary for producing and bringing
to market the most costly portion of the supply required. The natural
value is synonymous with the Cost Value, and the cost value of a thing,
means the cost value of the most costly portion of it.

VIII. Cost of Production consists of several elements, some of which are
constant and universal, others occasional. The universal elements of
cost of production are, the wages of the labour, and the profits of the
capital. The occasional elements are taxes, and aanya extra cost
occasioned by a scarcity value of some of the requisites.

IX. Rent is not an element in the cost of production of the commodity
which yields it; except in the cases (rather conceivable than actually
existing) in which it results from, and represents, a scarcity value.
But when land capable of yielding rent in agriculture is applied to some
other purpose, the rent which it would have yielded is an element in the
cost of production of the commodity which it is employed to produce.

X. Omitting the occasional elements; things which admit of indefinite
increase, naturally and permanently exchange for each other according to
the comparative amount of wages which must be paid for producing them,
and the comparative amount of profits which must be obtained by the
capitalists who pay those wages.

XI. The comparative amount of wages does not depend on what wages are in
themselves. High wages do not make high values, nor low wages low
values. The comparative amount of wages depends partly on the
comparative quantities of labour required, and partly on the comparative
rates of its remuneration.

XII. So, the comparative rate of profits does not depend on what profits
are in themselves; nor do high or low profits make high or low values.
It depends partly on the comparative lengths of time during which the
capital is employed, and partly on the comparative rate of profits in
different employments.

XIII. If two things are made by the same quantity of labour, and that
labour paid at the same rate, and if the wages of the blabourerb have to
be advanced for the same space of time, and the nature of the
cemploymentc does not require that there be a permanent difference in
their rate of profit; then, whether wages and profits be high or low,
and whether the quantity of labour expended be much or little, these two
things will, on the average, exchange for one another.

XIV. If one of two things commands, on the average, a greater value than
the other, the cause must be that it requires for its production either
a greater quantity of labour, or a kind of labour permanently paid at a
higher rate; or that the capital, or part of the capital, which supports
that Edition: current; Page: [499] labour, must be advanced for a longer
period; or lastly, that the production is attended with some
circumstance which requires to be compensated by a permanently higher
rate of profit.

XV. Of these elements, the quantity of labour required for the
production is the most important: the effect of the others is smaller,
though none of them are insignificant.

XVI. The lower profits are, the less important become the minor elements
of cost of production, and the less do commodities deviate from a value
proportioned to the quantity and quality of the labour required for
their production.

XVII. But every fall of profits lowers, in some degree, the cost value
of things made with much or durable machinery, and raises that of things
made by hand; and every rise of profits does the reverse.

§ 2. [How the theory of Value is modified by the case of labourers
cultivating for subsistence] Such is the general theory of Exchange
Value. It is necessary, however, to remark that this theory contemplates
a system of production carried on by capitalists for profit, and not by
labourers for subsistence. In proportion as we aadmita this last
supposition—and in most countries we must admit it, at least in respect
of agricultural produce, to a very bgreatb extent—such of the preceding
theorems as relate to the dependence of value on cost of production will
require modification. Those theorems are all grounded on the
supposition, that the producer’s object and aim is to derive a profit
from his capital. This granted, it follows that he must sell his
commodity at the price which will afford the ordinary rate of profit,
that is to say, it must exchange for other commodities at its cost
value. But the peasant proprietor, the metayer, and even the
peasant-farmer or allotment-holder—the labourer, under whatever name,
producing on his own account—is seeking, not an investment for his
little capital, but an advantageous employment for his time and labour.
His disbursements, beyond his own maintenance and that of his family,
are so small, that nearly the whole proceeds of the sale of cthe produce
arec wages of dlabour. When he and his family have been fed from the
produce of ethee farm (and perhaps clothed with materials grown thereon,
and manufactured in the family) he may, in respect of the supplementary
remuneration derived from the sale of fthef surplus produce, be compared
to those labourers who, deriving their subsistence from an independent
source, can afford to sell their labour at any price which is to their
minds worth the exertion. A Edition: current; Page: [500] peasant, who
supports himself and his family with one portion of his produce, will
often sell the remainder very much below what would be its cost value to
gtheg capitalist.

There is, however, even in this case, a minimum, or inferior limit, of
value. The hproduce which he carries to market, must bring in to him the
value of all necessaries which he is compelled to purchase; and it must
enable him to pay his rent. Rent, under peasant cultivation, is not
governed by the principles set forth in the chapters immediately
preceding, but is either determined by custom, as in the case of
metayers, or, if fixed by competition, depends on the ratio of
population to land. Rent, therefore, in this case, is an element of cost
of production. The peasant must work until he has cleared his rent and
the price of all purchased necessaries. After this, he will go on
working only if he can sell the produce for such a price as will
overcome his aversion to labour.

The minimum just mentioned is what the peasant must obtain in exchange
for the whole of his surplus produce. But inasmuch as this surplus is
not a fixed quantity, but may be either greater or less according to the
degree of his industry, a minimum value for the whole of it does not
give any minimum value for a definite quantity of the commodity. In this
state of things, therefore, it can hardly be said, that the value
depends at all on cost of production. It depends entirely on demand and
supply, that is, on the proportion between the quantity of surplus food
which the peasants choose to produce, and the numbers of the
non-agricultural, or rather of the non-peasant population. If the buying
class iwerei numerous and the growing class lazy, food jmightj be
permanently at a scarcity price. I am not aware that this case has
anywhere a real existence. If the growing class is energetic and
industrious, and the buyers few, food will be extremely cheap. This also
is a rare case, though some parts of France perhaps approximate to it.
The common cases are, either that, as in Ireland kuntil latelyk, the
peasant class is indolent and the buyers few, or the peasants
industrious and the town population numerous and opulent, as in Belgium,
the north of Italy, and parts of Germany. The price of the produce will
adjust itself to these varieties of lcircumstancesl, unless modified, as
in many cases it is, by the competition of producers who are not
peasants, or by the prices of foreign markets.

§ 3. [How the theory of Value is modified by the case of slave labour]
Another anomalous case is that of slave-grown produce: which presents,
however, by no means the same degree of complication. The slave-owner
Edition: current; Page: [501] is a capitalist, and his inducement to
aproductiona consists in a profit on his capital. This profit must
amount to the ordinary rate. In respect to his expenses, he is in the
same position as if his slaves were free labourers working with their
present efficiency, and bwereb hired with wages equal to their present
cost. If the cost is less in proportion to the work done, than the wages
of free labour would be, so much the greater are his profits: but if all
other producers in the country possess the same advantage, the values of
commodities will not be at all affected by it. The only case in which
they can be affected, is when the privilege of cheap labour is confined
to particular branches of production, free labourers at cproportionallyc
higher wages being employed in the remainder. In this dcase,d as in all
cases of permanent inequality between the wages of different
employments, prices and values receive the impress of the inequality.
Slave-grown will exchange for non-slave-grown commodities in a less
ratio than that of the equantitye of labour required for their
production; the value of the former will be less, fof the latter
greater, than if slavery did not exist.

The further adaptation of the theory of value to the varieties of
existing or possible industrial systems may be left with great advantage
to the intelligent reader. It is well said by Montesquieu, “Il ne faut
pas toujours tellement épuiser un sujet, qu’on ne laisse rien à faire au
lecteur. Il ne s’agit pas de faire lire, mais de faire penser.”*

Edition: current; Page: [502]


CHAPTER VII: Of Money

§ 1. [Purposes of a Circulating Medium] Having proceeded thus far in
ascertaining the general laws of Value, without introducing the idea of
Money (except occasionally for illustration,) it is time that we should
now superadd that idea, and consider in what manner the principles of
the mutual interchange of commodities are affected by the use of what is
termed a Medium of Exchange.

In order to understand the manifold functions of a Circulating Medium,
there is no better way than to consider what are the principal
inconveniences which we should experience if we had not such a medium.
The first and most obvious would be the want of a common measure for
values of different sorts. If a tailor had only coats, and wanted to buy
bread or a horse, it would be very troublesome to ascertain how much
bread he ought to obtain for a coat, or how many coats he should give
for a horse. The calculation must be recommenced on different data,
every time he bartered his coats for a different kind of article; and
there could be no current price, or regular quotations of value. Whereas
now each thing has a current price in money, and he gets over all
difficulties by reckoning his coat at 4l. or 5l., and a four-pound loaf
at 6d. or 7d. As it is much easier to compare different lengths by
expressing them in a common language aofa feet and inches, so it is much
easier to compare values by means of a common language bofb pounds,
shillings, and pence. In no other way can values be arranged one above
another in a scale; in no other can a person conveniently calculate the
sum of his possessions; and it is easier to ascertain and remember the
relations of many things to one thing, than their innumerable cross
relations with one another. This advantage of having a common language
in which values may be expressed, is, even by itself, so important, that
some such mode of expressing and computing them would probably be used
even if a pound or a shilling did not express any real thing, but a mere
unit of calculation. It is said that there are African tribes in which
this somewhat artificial contrivance actually prevails. They calculate
the value of things in a sort of money of account, called macutes.
Edition: current; Page: [503] They say, one thing is worth ten macutes,
another fifteen, another twenty.* There is no real thing called a
macute: it is a conventional unit, for the more convenient comparison of
things with one another.

This advantage, however, forms but an inconsiderable part of the
economical benefits derived from the use of money. The inconveniences of
barter are so great, that without some more commodious means of
effecting exchanges, the division of employments could hardly have been
carried to any considerable extent. A tailor, who had nothing but coats,
might starve before he could find any person having bread to sell who
wanted a coat: besides, he would not want as much bread at a time as
would be worth a coat, and the coat could not be divided. Every person,
therefore, would at all times hasten to dispose of his commodity in
exchange for anything which, though it might not be fitted to his own
immediate wants, was in great and general demand, and easily divisible,
so that he might be sure of being able to purchase with it whatever was
offered for sale. The primary necessaries of life possess these
properties in a high degree. Bread is extremely divisible, and an object
of universal desire. Still, this is not the sort of thing required: for,
of food, unless in expectation of a scarcity, no one wishes to possess
more at once, than is wanted for immediate consumption; so that a person
is never sure of finding an immediate purchaser for articles of food;
and unless soon disposed of, most of them perish. The thing which people
would select to keep by them for making purchases, must be one which,
besides being divisible and generally desired, does not deteriorate by
keeping. This reduces the choice to a small number of articles.

§ 2. [Why Gold and Silver are fitted for the purposes of a Circulating
Medium] By a tacit concurrence, almost all nations, at a very early
period, fixed upon certain metals, and especially gold and silver, to
serve this purpose. No other substances unite the necessary qualities in
so great a degree, with so many subordinate advantages. Next to food and
clothing, and in some climates even before clothing, the strongest
inclination in a rude state of society is for personal ornament, and for
the kind of distinction which is obtained by rarity or costliness in
such ornaments. After the immediate necessities of life were satisfied,
every one was eager to accumulate as great a store as possible of things
at once costly and ornamental; which were chiefly gold, silver, and
jewels. These were the things which it most pleased every one to
possess, and which there was most certainty of finding others willing to
receive in exchange for any kind of produce. They were among the most
imperishable of all substances. They were also portable, and containing
great value in small bulk, were easily hid; a consideration of Edition:
current; Page: [504] much importance in an age of insecurity. Jewels are
inferior to gold and silver in the quality of divisibility; and are of
very various qualities, not to be accurately discriminated without great
trouble. Gold and silver are eminently divisible, and when pure, always
of the same quality; and their purity may be ascertained and certified
by a public authority.

Accordingly, though furs have been employed as money in some countries,
cattle in others, in Chinese Tartary cubes of tea closely pressed
together, the shell called cowries on the coast of Western Africa, and
in Abyssinia at this day blocks of rock salt; though even of metals, the
less costly have sometimes been chosen, as iron in Lacadæmon from an
ascetic policy, copper in the early Roman republic from the poverty of
the people; gold and silver have been agenerallya preferred by nations
which were able to obtain them, either by industry, commerce, or
conquest. To the qualities which originally recommended them, another
came to be added, the importance of which only unfolded itself by
degrees. Of all commodities, they are among the least influenced by any
of the causes which produce fluctuations of value. No commodity is quite
free from such fluctuations. Gold and silver have sustained, since the
beginning of history, one great permanent alteration of value, from the
discovery of the American mines; and some temporary variations, such as
that which, in the last great war, was produced by the absorption of the
metals in hoards, and in the military chests of the immense armies
constantly in the field. In the present age the opening of bnew sources
of supply, so abundant as the Ural mountains, California, and
Australiab, may be the commencement of another period of decline, on the
limits of which it would be useless at present to speculate. But on the
whole, no commodities are so little exposed to causes of variation. They
cfluctuate lessc than almost any other things in their cost of
production. And from their durability, the total quantity in existence
is at all times so great in proportion to the annual supply, that the
effect on value even of a change in the cost of production is not
sudden: a very long time being required to diminish materially the
quantity in existence, and even to increase it very greatly dnot being
ad rapid process. Gold and silver, therefore, are more fit than any
other commodity to be the subject of engagements for receiving or paying
a given quantity at some distant period. If the engagement were made in
corn, a failure of crops might increase the burthen of the payment in
one year to fourfold what was intended, or an exuberant harvest sink it
in another to one-fourth. If stipulated in cloth, some manufacturing
invention might permanently reduce the Edition: current; Page: [505]
payment to a tenth of its original value. Such things have eoccurrede
even in the case of payments stipulated in gold and silver; but the
great fall of their value after the discovery of America, is, fas yet,f
the only authenticated instance; and in this case the change was
extremely gradual, being spread over a period of many years.

When gold and silver had become virtually a medium of exchange, by
becoming the things for which people generally sold, and with which they
generally bought, whatever they had to sell or to buy; the contrivance
of coining obviously suggested itself. By this process the metal was
divided into convenient portions, of any degree of smallness, and
bearing a recognised proportion to one another; and the trouble was
saved of weighing and assaying at every change of possessors, an
inconvenience which on the occasion of small purchases would soon have
become insupportable. Governments found it their interest to take the
operation into their own hands, and to interdict all coining by private
persons; indeed, their guarantee was often the only one which would have
been relied on, a reliance however which very often it ill deserved;
profligate governments having until a very modern period gseldomg
scrupled, for the sake of robbing their creditors, to confer on all
other debtors a licence to rob theirs, by the shallow and impudent
artifice of lowering the standard; that least covert of all modes of
knavery, which consists in calling a shilling a pound, that a debt of
honeh hundred pounds may be cancelled by the payment of a hundred
shillings. It would have been as simple a plan, and would have answered
the purpose as well, to have enacted that “a hundred” should always be
interpreted to mean five, which would have affected the same reduction
in all pecuniary contracts, and would not have been at all more
shameless. Such strokes of policy have not wholly ceased to be
recommended, but they have ceased to be practised; except occasionally
through the medium of paper money, in which case the character of the
transaction, from the greater obscurity of the subject, is a little less
barefaced.

§ 3. [Money is a mere contrivance for facilitating exchanges, which does
not affect the laws of Value] Money, when its use has grown habitual, is
the medium through which the incomes of the different members of the
community are distributed to them, and the measure by which they
estimate their possessions. As it is always by means of money that
people provide for their different necessities, there grows up in their
minds a powerful association leading them to regard money as wealth in a
more peculiar sense than any other article; and even those who pass
their lives in the Edition: current; Page: [506] production of the most
useful objects, acquire the habit of regarding those objects as chiefly
important by their capacity of being exchanged for money. A person who
parts with money to obtain commodities, unless he intends to sell them,
appears to the imagination to be making a worse bargain than a person
who parts with commodities to get money; the one seems to be spending
his means, the other adding to them. Illusions which, though now in some
measure dispelled, were long powerful enough to overmaster the mind of
every politician, both speculative and practical, in Europe.

It must be evident, however, that the mere introduction of a particular
mode of exchanging things for one another, by first exchanging a thing
for money, and then exchanging the money for something else, makes no
difference in the essential character of transactions. It is not with
money that things are really purchased. Nobody’s income (except that of
the gold or silver miner) is derived from the precious metals. The
pounds or shillings which a person receives weekly or yearly, are not
what constitutes his income; they are a sort of tickets or orders which
he can present for payment at any shop he pleases, and which entitle him
to receive a certain value of any commodity that he makes choice of. The
farmer pays his labourers and his landlord in these tickets, as the most
convenient plan for himself and them; but their real income is their
share of his corn, cattle, and hay, and it makes no essential difference
whether he distributes it to them adirectlya, or sells it for them and
gives them the price; but as they would have to sell it for money if he
did not, and as he is a seller at any rate, it best suits the purposes
of all, that he should sell their share along with his own, and leave
the labourers more leisure for work and the landlord for being idle. The
capitalists, except those who are producers of the precious metals,
derive no part of their income from those metals, since they only get
them by buying them with their own produce: while all other persons have
their incomes paid to them by the capitalists, or by those who have
received payment from the capitalists, and as the capitalists have
nothing, from the first, except their produce, it is that and nothing
else which supplies all incomes furnished by them. There cannot, in
short, be intrinsically a more insignificant thing, in the economy of
society, than money; except in the character of a contrivance for
sparing time and labour. It is a bmachineb for doing quickly and
commodiously, what would be done, though less quickly and commodiously,
without it: and like many other kinds of machinery, it only exerts a
distinct and independent influence of its own when it gets out of order.

The introduction of money does not interfere with the operation of any
of the Laws of Value laid down in the preceding chapters. The reasons
which make the temporary or market value of things depend on the
Edition: current; Page: [507] demand and supply, and their average and
permanent values upon their cost of production, are as applicable to a
money system as to a system of barter. Things which by barter would
exchange for one another, will, if sold for money, sell for an equal
amount of it, and so will exchange for one another still, though the
process of exchanging them will consist of two operations instead of
only one. The relations of commodities to one another remain unaltered
by money: the only new relation introduced, is their relation to money
itself; how much or how little money they will exchange for; in other
words, how the Exchange Value of money itself is determined. And this is
not a question of any difficulty, when the illusion is dispelled, which
caused money to be looked upon as a peculiar cthingc, not governed by
the same laws as other things. Money is a commodity, and its value is
determined like that of other commodities, temporarily by demand and
supply, permanently and on the average by cost of production. The
illustration of these principles, considered in their application to
money, must be given in some detail, on account of the confusion which,
in minds not dscientificallyd instructed on the subject, envelopes the
whole matter; partly from a lingering remnant of the old misleading
associations, and partly from the mass of vapoury and baseless
speculation with which this, more than any other topic of political
economy, has in latter times become surrounded. I shall therefore treat
of the Value of Money in a chapter apart.

Edition: current; Page: [508]


CHAPTER VIII: Of the Value of Money, as Dependent on Demand and Supply

§ 1. [The value of money is an ambiguous expression] It is unfortunate
that in the very outset of the subject we have to clear from our path a
formidable ambiguity of language. The Value of Money is to appearance an
expression as precise, as free from possibility of misunderstanding, as
any in science. The value of a thing, is what it will exchange for: the
value of money, is what money will exchange for; the purchasing power of
money. If prices are low, money will buy much of other things, and is of
high value; if prices are high, it will buy little of other things, and
is of low value. The value of money is inversely as general prices:
falling as they rise, and rising as they fall.

But unhappily the same phrase is also employed, in the current language
of commerce, in a very different sense. Money, which is so commonly
understood as the synonyme of wealth, is more especially the term in use
to denote it when ait is the subject of borrowinga. When one person
lends to another, as well as when he pays wages or rent to another, what
he transfers is not the mere money, but a right to a certain value of
the produce of the country, to be selected at pleasure; the lender
having first bought this right, by giving for it a portion of his
capital. What he really lends is so much capital; the money is the mere
instrument of transfer. But the capital usually passes from the lender
to the receiver through the means either of money, or of an order to
receive money, and at any rate it is in money that the capital is
computed and estimated. Hence, borrowing capital is universally called
borrowing money; the loan market is called the money market: those who
have their capital disposable for investment on loan are called the
monied class: and the equivalent given for the use of capital, or in
other words, interest, is not only called the interest of money, but, by
a grosser perversion of terms, the value of money. This misapplication
of language, assisted by some fallacious appearances which Edition:
current; Page: [509] we shall notice and clear up hereafter,* has
created a general notion among persons in business, that the Value of
Money, meaning the rate of interest, has an intimate connexion with the
Value of Money in its proper sense, the value or purchasing power of the
circulating medium. We shall breturnb to this subject before long: at
present it is enough to say, that by Value I shall always mean Exchange
Value, and by money the medium of exchange, not the capital which is
passed from hand to hand through that medium.

§ 2. [The value of money depends, cæteris paribus, on its quantity] The
value or purchasing power of money depends, in the first instance, on
demand and supply. But demand and supply, in relation to money, present
themselves in a somewhat different shape from the demand and supply of
other things.

The supply of a commodity means the quantity offered for sale. But it is
not usual to speak of offering money for sale. People are not usually
said to buy or sell money. This, however, is merely an accident of
language. In point of fact, money is bought and sold like other things,
whenever other things are bought and sold for money. Whoever sells corn,
or tallow, or cotton, buys money. Whoever buys bread, or wine, or
clothes, sells money to the dealer in those articles. The money with
which people are offering to buy, is money offered for sale. The supply
of money, then, is the quantity of it which people are wanting to lay
out; that is, all the money they have in their possession, except what
they are hoarding, or at least keeping by them as a reserve for future
contingencies. The supply of money, in short, is all the money in
circulation at the time.

The demand for money, again, consists of all the goods offered for sale.
Every seller of goods is a buyer of money, and the goods he brings with
him constitute his demand. The demand for money differs from the demand
for other things in this, that it is limited only by the means of the
purchaser. The demand for other things is for so much and no more; but
there is always a demand for as much money as can be got. Persons may
indeed refuse to sell, and withdraw their goods from the market, if they
cannot get for them what they consider a sufficient price. But this is
only when they think that the price will rise, and that they shall get
more money by waiting. If they thought the low price likely to be
permanent, they would take what they could get. It is always a sine quâ
non with a dealer to dispose of his goods.

As the whole of the goods in the market compose the demand for Edition:
current; Page: [510] money, so the whole of the money constitutes the
demand for goods. The money and the goods are seeking each other for the
purpose of being exchanged. They are reciprocally supply and demand to
one another. It is indifferent whether, in characterizing the phenomena,
we speak of the demand and asupply of goods, or the supply and the
demand of money. They are equivalent expressions.

We shall proceed to illustrate this proposition more fully. And in doing
this, the reader will remark a great difference between the class of
questions which now occupy us, and those which we previously had under
discussion respecting Values. In considering Value, we were only
concerned with causes which acted upon particular commodities apart from
the rest. Causes which affect all commodities alike, do not act upon
values. But in considering the relation between goods and money, it is
with the causes that operate upon all goods whatever, that we are
bspeciallyb concerned. We are comparing goods of all sorts on one side,
with money on the other side, as things to be exchanged against each
other.

Suppose, everything else being the same, that there is an increase cinc
the quantity of money, say by the arrival of a foreigner in a place,
with a treasure of gold and silver. When he commences expending it (for
this question it matters not whether productively or unproductively), he
adds to the supply of money, and by the same act, to the demand for
goods. Doubtless he adds, in the first instance, to the demand only for
certain kinds of goods, namely, those which he selects for purchase; he
will immediately raise the price of those, and so far as he is
individually concerned, of those only. If he spends his funds in giving
entertainments, he will raise the prices of food and wine. If he expends
them in establishing a manufactory, he will raise the prices of labour
and materials. But at the higher prices, more money will pass into the
hands of the sellers of these different articles; and they, whether
labourers or dealers, having more money to lay out, will create an
increased demand for all the things which they are accustomed to
purchase: these accordingly will rise in price, and so on until the rise
has reached everything. I say everything, though it is of course
possible that the influx of money might take place through the medium of
some new class of consumers, or in such a manner as to alter the
proportions of different classes of consumers to one another, so that a
greater share of the national income than before would thenceforth be
expended in some articles, and a smaller in others; exactly as if a
change had taken place in the tastes and wants of the community. If this
were the case, then until production had accommodated itself to this
change in the comparative demand for different things, there would be a
real alteration Edition: current; Page: [511] in values, and some things
would rise in price more than others, while some perhaps would not rise
at all. These effects, however, would evidently proceed, not from the
mere increase of money, but from accessory circumstances attending it.
We are now only called upon to consider what would be the effect of an
increase of money, considered by itself. Supposing the money in the
hands of individuals to be increased, the wants and inclinations of the
community collectively in respect to consumption remaining exactly the
same; the increase of demand would reach all things equally, and there
would be an universal rise of prices. We might suppose, with Hume, that
some morning, every person in the nation should wake and find a gold
coin in his pocket: this example, however, would involve an alteration
of the proportions in the demand for different commodities; the luxuries
of the poor would, in the first instance be raised in price, in a much
greater degree than other things. Let us rather suppose, therefore, that
to every pound, or shilling, or penny, in the possession of any one,
another pound, shilling, or penny, were suddenly added. There would be
an increased money demand, and consequently an increased money value, or
price, for things of all sorts. This increased value would do no good to
any one; would make no difference, except that of having to reckon
pounds, shillings, and pence, in higher numbers. It would be an increase
of values only as estimated in money, a thing only wanted to buy other
things with; and would not enable any one to buy more of them than
before. Prices would have risen in a certain ratio, and the value of
money would have fallen in the same ratio.

It is to be remarked that this ratio would be precisely that in which
the quantity of money had been increased. If the whole money in
circulation was doubled, prices would be doubled. If it was only
increased one-fourth, prices would rise one-fourth. There would be
one-fourth more money, all of which would be used to purchase goods of
some description. When there had been time for the increased supply of
money to reach all markets, or (according to the conventional metaphor)
to permeate all the channels of circulation, all prices would have risen
one-fourth. But the general rise of price is independent of this
diffusing and equalizing process. Even if some prices were raised more,
and others less, the average rise would be one-fourth. This is a
necessary consequence of the fact, that a fourth more money would have
been given for only the same quantity of goods. General prices,
therefore, would in any case be a fourth higher.

The very same effect would be produced on prices if we suppose the goods
diminished, instead of the money increased: and the contrary effect if
the goods were increased or the money diminished. If there were less
money in the hands of the community, and the same amount of goods to be
sold, less money altogether would be given for them, and they would be
Edition: current; Page: [512] sold at lower prices; lower, too, in the
precise ratio in which the money was diminished. So that the value of
money, other things being the same, varies inversely as its quantity;
every increase of quantity lowering the value, and every diminution
raising it, in a ratio exactly equivalent.

This, it must be observed, is a property peculiar to money. We did not
find it to be true of commodities generally, that every diminution of
supply raised the value exactly in proportion to the deficiency, or that
every increase lowered it in the precise ratio of the excess. Some
things are usually affected in a greater ratio than that of the excess
or deficiency, others usually in a less: because, in ordinary cases of
demand, the desire, being for the thing itself, may be stronger or
weaker: and the amount of what people are willing to expend on it, being
in any case a limited quantity, may be affected in very unequal degrees
by difficulty or facility of attainment. But in the case of money, which
is desired as the means of universal purchase, the demand consists of
everything which people have to sell; and the only limit to what they
are willing to give, is the limit set by their having nothing more to
offer. The whole of the goods being in any case exchanged for the whole
of the money which comes into the market to be laid out, they will sell
for less or more of it, exactly according as less or more is brought.

§ 3. [The value of money depends also on the rapidity of circulation]
From what precedes, it might for a moment be supposed, that all the
goods on sale in a country at any one time, are exchanged for all the
money existing and in circulation at that same time: or in other words,
that there is always in circulation in a country, a quantity of money
equal in value to the whole of the goods then and there on sale. But
this would be a complete misapprehension. The money laid out is equal in
value to the goods it purchases; but the quantity of money laid out is
not the same thing with the quantity in circulation. As the money passes
from hand to hand, the same piece of money is laid out many times,
before all the things on sale at one time are purchased and finally
removed from the market: and each pound or dollar must be counted for as
many pounds or dollars, as the number of times it changes hands in order
to effect this object. The greater part of the goods must also be
counted more than once, not only because most things pass through the
hands of several sets of manufacturers and dealers before they assume
the form in which they are finally consumed, but because in times of
speculation (and all times are so, more or less) the same goods are
often bought repeatedly, to be resold for a profit, before they are
bought for the purpose of consumption at all.

If we assume the quantity of goods on sale, and the number of times
Edition: current; Page: [513] those goods are resold, to be fixed
quantities, the value of money will depend upon its quantity, together
with the average number of times that each piece changes hands in the
process. The whole of the goods sold (counting each resale of the same
goods as so much added to the goods) have been exchanged for the whole
of the money, multiplied by the number of purchases made on the average
by each piece. Consequently, the amount of goods and of transactions
being the same, the value of money is inversely as its quantity
multiplied by what is called the rapidity of circulation. And the
quantity of money in circulation, is equal to the money value of all the
goods sold, divided by the number which expresses the rapidity of
circulation.

The phrase, rapidity of circulation, requires some comment. It must not
be understood to mean, the number of purchases made by each piece of
money in a given time. Time is not the thing to be considered. The state
of society may be such, that each piece of money hardly performs more
than one purchase in a year; but if this arises from the small number of
transactions—from the small amount of business done, the want of
activity in traffic, or because what traffic there is, mostly takes
place by barter—it constitutes no reason why prices should be lower, or
the value of money higher. The essential point is, not how often the
same money changes hands in a given time, but how often it changes hands
in order to perform a given amount of traffic. We must compare the
number of purchases made by the money in a given time, not with the time
itself, but with the goods sold in that same time. If each piece of
money changes hands on an average ten times while goods are sold to the
value of a million sterling, it is evident that the money required to
circulate those goods is 100,000l. And conversely, if the money in
circulation is 100,000l., and each piece changes hands by the purchase
of goods ten times in a month, the sales of goods for money which take
place every month must amount on the average to 1,000,000l.

Rapidity of circulation being a phrase so ill adapted to express the
only thing which it is of any importance to express by it, and having a
tendency to confuse the subject by suggesting a meaning extremely
different from the one intended, it would be a good thing if the phrase
could be got rid of, and another substituted, more directly significant
of the idea meant to be conveyed. Some such expression as “the
efficiency of money,” though not unexceptionable, would do better; as it
would point attention to the quantity of work done, without suggesting
the idea of estimating it by time. Until an appropriate term can be
devised, we must be content awhen ambiguity is to be apprehended,a to
express the idea by the circumlocution Edition: current; Page: [514]
which alone conveys it adequately, namely, the average number of
purchases made by each piece in order to effect a given pecuniary amount
of transactions.

§ 4. [Explanations and limitations of this principle] The proposition
which we have laid down respecting the dependence of general prices upon
the quantity of money in circulation, must abe understood as applying
only to a state of things in which money, that is, gold or silver, is
the exclusive instrument of exchange, and actually passes from hand to
hand at every purchase, credit in any of its shapes being unknown. When
credit comes into play as a means of purchasing, distinct from money in
hand, we shall hereafter find that the connexion between prices and the
amount of the circulating medium is much less direct and intimate, and
that such connexion as does exist, no longer admits of so simple a mode
of expression. But on a subject so full of complexity as that of
currency and prices, it is necessary to lay the foundation of our theory
in a thorough understanding of the most simple cases, which we shall
always find lying as a groundwork or substratum under those which arise
in practice. That an increase of the quantity of money raises prices,
and a diminution lowers them, is the most elementary proposition in the
theory of currency, and without it we should have no key to any of the
others. In any state of things, however, except the simple and primitive
one which we have supposed, the proposition is only true other things
being the same: and what those other things are, which must be the same,
we are not yet ready to pronounce. We can, however, point out, even now,
one or two of the cautions with which the principle must be guarded in
attempting to make use of it for the practical explanation of phenomena;
cautions the more indispensable, as the doctrine, though a scientific
truth, has of late years been the foundation of a greater mass of false
theory, and erroneous interpretation of facts, than any other
proposition relating to interchange. From the time of the resumption of
cash payments by the Act of 1819, and especially since the commercial
crisis of 1825, the favourite explanation of every rise or fall of
prices has been “the currency;” and like most popular theories, the
doctrine has been applied with little regard to the conditions necessary
for making it bcorrectb.

For example, it is habitually assumed that whenever there is a greater
amount of money in the country, or in existence, a rise of prices must
necessarily follow. But this is by no means an inevitable consequence.
In no commodity is it the quantity in existence, but the quantity
offered for sale, that determines the value. Whatever may be the
quantity of money in the country, only that part of it will affect
prices, which goes into Edition: current; Page: [515] the cmarket ofc
commodities, and is there actually exchanged against goods. Whatever
increases the amount of this portion of the money in the country, dtends
to raise prices. But money hoarded does not act on prices. Money kept in
reserve by individuals to meet contingencies which do not occur, does
not act on prices. The money in the coffers of the Bank, or retained as
a reserve by private bankers, does not act on prices until drawn out,
nor even then unless drawn out to be expended in commodities.

It frequently happens that money, to a considerable amount, is brought
into the country, is there actually einvestede as capital, and again
flows out, without having ever once acted upon the markets of
commodities, but only upon the market of securities, or, as it is
commonly though improperly called, the money market. Let us return to
the case already put for illustration, that of a foreigner landing in
the country with a treasure. We supposed him to employ his treasure in
the purchase of goods for his own use, or in setting up a manufactory
and employing labourers; and in either case he would, cæteris paribus,
raise prices. But instead of doing either of these things, he might very
probably prefer to invest his fortune at interest; which we shall
suppose him to do in the most obvious way, by becoming a competitor for
a portion of the stock, exchequer bills, railway debentures, mercantile
bills, mortgages, &c., which are at all times in the hands of the
public. By doing this he would raise the prices of those different
securities, or in other words would lower the rate of interest; and
since this would disturb the relation previously existing between the
rate of interest on capital in the country itself, and that in foreign
countries, it would probably induce some of those who had floating
capital seeking employment, to send it abroad for foreign investment
rather than buy securities at home at the fadvancedf price. As much
money might thus go out as had previously come in, while the prices of
commodities would have shown no trace of its temporary presence. This is
a case highly deserving of attention: and it is a fact now beginning to
be recognised, that the passage of the precious metals from country to
country is determined much more than was formerly supposed, by the state
of the loan market in different countries, and much less by the state of
prices.

Another point must be adverted to, in order to avoid serious error in
the interpretation of mercantile phenomena. If there be, at any time, an
increase in the number of money transactions, a thing continually liable
to happen from differences in the activity of speculation, and even in
the time of year (since certain kinds of business are transacted only at
particular seasons); an increase of the currency which is only
proportional to this increase of transactions, and is of no longer
duration, has no tendency to raise prices. Edition: current; Page: [516]
At the quarterly periods when the public dividends are paid at the Bank,
a sudden increase takes place of the money in the hands of the public;
an increase estimated at from a fifth to two-fifths of the whole issues
of the Bank of England. Yet this never has any effect on prices; and in
a very few weeks, the currency has again shrunk into its usual
dimensions, by a mere reduction in the demands of the public (after so
copious a supply of ready money) for accommodation from the Bank in the
way of discount or loan. In like manner the currency of the agricultural
districts fluctuates in amount at different seasons of the year. It is
always lowest in August: “it rises generally towards Christmas, and
obtains its greatest elevation about Lady-day, when the farmer commonly
lays in his stock, and has to pay his rent and summer taxes,” and when
he therefore makes his principal applications to country bankers for
loans. “Those variations occur with the same regularity as the season,
and with just as little disturbance of the markets as the quarterly
fluctuations of the notes of the Bank of England. As soon as the extra
payments have been completed, the superfluous” currency, which is
estimated at half a million, “as certainly and immediately is reabsorbed
and disappears.”*

If extra currency were not forthcoming to make these extra payments, one
of three things must happen. Either the payments must be made without
money, by a resort to some of those contrivances by which its use is
dispensed with; or there must be an increase in the rapidity of
circulation, the same sum of money being made to perform more payments;
or if neither of these things took place, money to make the extra
payments must be withdrawn from the market for commodities, and prices,
consequently, must fall. An increase of the circulating medium,
conformable in extent and duration to the temporary stress of business,
does not raise prices, but merely prevents this fall.

The sequel of our investigation will point out many other
gqualifications with which the proposition must be received, that the
value of the circulating medium depends on the demand and supply, and is
in the inverse ratio of the quantityh; qualifications which, under a
complex system of credit like that existing in England, render the
proposition ian extremelyi incorrect expression of the facth.

Edition: current; Page: [517]


CHAPTER IX: Of the Value of Money, as Dependent on Cost of Production

§ 1. [The value of money, in a state of freedom, conforms to the value
of the bullion contained in it] But money, no more than commodities in
general, has its value definitively determined by demand and supply. The
ultimate regulator of its value is Cost of Production.

We are supposing, of course, that things are left to themselves.
Governments have not always left things to themselves. They have
undertaken to prevent the quantity of money from adjusting itself
according to spontaneous laws, and have endeavoured to regulate it at
their pleasure; generally with a view of keeping a greater quantity of
money in the country, than would otherwise have remained there. It was,
until lately, the policy of all governments to interdict the exportation
and the melting of money; while, by encouraging the exportation and
impeding the importation of other things, they endeavoured to have a
stream of money constantly flowing in. By this course they gratified two
prejudices; they drew, or thought that they drew, more money into the
country, which they believed to be tantamount to more wealth; and they
gave, or thought that they gave, to all producers and dealers, high
prices, which, though no real advantage, people are always inclined to
suppose to be one.

In this attempt to regulate the value of money artificially by means of
the supply, governments have never succeeded in the degree, or even in
the manner, which they intended. Their prohibitions against exporting or
melting the coin have never been effectual. A commodity of such small
bulk in proportion to its value is so easily smuggled, and still more
easily melted, that it has been impossible by the most stringent
measures to prevent these operations. All the risk which it was in the
power of governments to attach to them, was outweighed by a very
moderate profit.* In Edition: current; Page: [518] the more indirect
mode of aiming at the same purpose, by throwing difficulties in the way
of making the returns for exported goods in any other commodity than
money, they have not been quite so unsuccessful. They have not, indeed,
succeeded in making money flow continuously into the country; but they
have to a certain extent been able to keep it at a higher than its
natural level; and have, thus far, removed the value of money from
exclusive dependence on the causes which fix the avaluea of things not
artificially interfered with.

We are, however, to suppose a state, not of artificial regulation, but
of freedom. In that state, and assuming no charge to be made for
coinage, the value of money will conform to the value of the bullion of
which it is made. A pound weight of gold or silver in coin, and the same
weight in an ingot, will precisely exchange for one another. On the
supposition of freedom, the metal cannot be worth more in the state of
bullion than of coin; for as it can be melted without any loss of time,
and with hardly any expense, this would of course be done until the
quantity in circulation was so much diminished as to equalize its value
with that of the same weight in bullion. It may be thought however that
the coin, though it cannot be of less, may be, and being a manufactured
article will naturally be, of greater value than the bullion contained
in it, on the same principle on which linen cloth is of more value than
an equal weight of linen yarn. This would be true, were it not that
Government, in this country, and in some others, coins money gratis for
any one who furnishes the metal. The labour and expense of coinage, when
not charged to the possessor, do not raise the value of the article. If
Government opened an office where, on delivery of a given weight of
yarn, it returned the same weight of cloth to any one who asked for it,
cloth would be worth no more in the market than the yarn it contained.
As soon as coin is worth a fraction more than the value of the bullion,
it becomes the interest of the holders of bullion to send it to be
coined. If Government, however, throws the expense of coinage, as is
reasonable, upon the holder, by making a charge to cover the expense
(which is done by giving back rather less in coin than has been received
in bullion, and is called levying a seignorage), the coin will rise, to
the extent of the seignorage, above the value of the bullion. If the
Mint kept back one per cent, to pay the expense of coinage, it would be
against the interest of the holders of bullion to have it coined, until
the coin was more valuable than the bullion by at least that fraction.
The coin, therefore, would be kept one per cent higher in value, which
could only be by keeping it one per cent less in quantity, than if its
coinage were gratuitous.

The Government might attempt to obtain a profit by the transaction, and
might lay on a seignorage calculated for that purpose; but whatever
Edition: current; Page: [519] they took for coinage beyond its expenses,
would be so much profit on private coining. Coining, though not so easy
an operation as melting, is far from a difficult one, and, when the coin
produced is of full weight and standard fineness, is very difficult to
detect. If, therefore, a profit could be made by coining good money, it
would certainly be done: and the attempt to make seignorage a source of
revenue would be defeated. Any attempt to keep the value of the coin at
an artificial elevation, not by a seignorage, but by refusing to coin,
would be frustrated in the same manner.*

§ 2. [The value of bullion is determined by the cost of production] The
value of money, then, conforms, permanently, and, in a state of freedom,
almost immediately, to the value of the metal of which it is made; with
the addition, or not, of the expenses of coinage, according as those
expenses are borne by the individual or by the state. This simplifies
extremely the question which we have here to consider: since gold and
silver bullion are commodities like any others, and their value depends,
like that of other things, on their cost of production.

To the majority of civilized countries, gold and silver are foreign
products: and the circumstances which govern the values of foreign
products, present some questions which we are not yet ready to examine.
For the present, therefore, we must suppose the country which is the
subject of our inquiries, to be supplied with gold and silver by its own
mines, reserving for future consideration how far our conclusions
require modification to adapt them to the more usual case.

Of the three classes into which commodities are divided—those absolutely
limited in supply, those which may be had in unlimited quantity at a
given cost of production, and those which may be had in unlimited
quantity, but at an increasing cost of production—the precious metals,
being the produce of mines, belong to the third class. Their natural
value, therefore, is ain the long runa proportional to their cost of
production in the most unfavourable existing circumstances, that is, at
the worst mine which it is necessary to work in order to obtain the
required supply. A Edition: current; Page: [520] pound weight of gold
will, in the bgold-producing countries, ultimately tend to exchangeb for
as much of every other commodity, as is produced at a cost equal to its
own; meaning by its own cost the cost cin labour and expense, at the
least productive sources of supply which the thenc existing demand makes
it necessary to work. The average value of gold is made to conform to
its natural value, in the same manner as the values of other things are
made to conform to their natural value. Suppose that it were selling
above its natural value; that is, above the value which is an equivalent
for the labour and expense of mining, and for the risks attending a
branch of industry in which nine out of ten experiments dhave usually
beend failures. A part of the mass of floating capital which is on the
look out for investment, would take the direction of mining enterprise;
the supply would thus be increased, and the value would fall. If, on the
contrary, it were selling below its natural value, miners would not be
obtaining the ordinary profit; they would slacken their works; if the
depreciation was great, some of the inferior mines would perhaps stop
working altogether: and a falling off in the annual supply, preventing
the annual wear and tear from being completely compensated, would by
degrees reduce the quantity, and restore the value.

When examined more closely, the following are the details of the
process. If gold is above its natural or cost value—the coin, as we have
seen, conforming in its value to the bullion—money will be of high
value, and the prices of all things, labour included, will be low. These
low prices will lower the expenses of all producers; but as their
returns will also be lowered, no advantage will be obtained by any
producer, except the producer of gold: whose returns from his mine, not
depending on price, will be the same as before, and his expenses being
less, he will obtain extra profits, and will be stimulated to increase
his production. E converso if the metal is below its natural value:
since this is as much as to say that prices are high, and the money
expenses of all producers unusually great: for this, however, all other
producers will be compensated by increased money returns: the miner
alone will extract from his mine no more metal than before, while his
expenses will be greater: his profits therefore being diminished or
annihilated, he will diminish his production, if not abandon his
employment.

In this manner it is that the value of money is made to conform to the
cost of production of the metal of which it is made. It may be well,
however, to repeat (what has been said before) that the adjustment takes
a long time to effect, in the case of a commodity so generally desired
and at the same time so durable as the precious metals. Being so largely
used not Edition: current; Page: [521] only as money but for plate and
ornament, there is at all times a very large quantity of these metals in
existence: while they are so slowly worn out, that a comparatively small
annual production is sufficient to keep up the supply, and to make any
addition to it which may be required by the increase of goods to be
circulated, or by the increased demand for gold and silver articles by
wealthy consumers. Even if this small annual supply were stopt entirely,
eit would require many years to reduce the quantity so much as to make
any very material difference in prices. The quantity may be increased,
much more rapidly than it can be diminished; but the increase must be
very great before it can make itself much felt over such a mass of the
precious metals as exists in the whole commercial world. And hence the
effects of all changes in the conditions of production of the precious
metals are at first, and continue to be for many years, questions of
quantity only, with little reference to cost of production. fMore
especially is this the case when, as at the present time, many new
sources of supply have been simultaneously opened, most of them
practicable by labour alone, without any capital in advance beyond a
pickaxe and a week’s food; and when the operations are as yet wholly
experimental, the comparative permanent productiveness of the different
sources being entirely unascertained.f

§ 3. [How this law is related to the principle laid down in the
preceding chapter] Since, however, the value of money really conforms,
like that of other things, though more slowly, to its cost of
production, some political economists have objected altogether to the
statement that the value of money depends on its quantity combined with
the rapidity of circulation; which, they think, is assuming a law for
money that does not exist for any other commodity, when the truth is
that it is governed by the very same laws. To this we may answer, in the
first place, that the statement in question assumes no peculiar law. It
is simply the law of demand and supply, which is acknowledged to be
applicable to all commodities, and which, in the case of money as of
most other things, is controlled, but not set aside, by the law of cost
of production, since cost of production would have no effect on value if
it could have none on supply. But, secondly, there really is, in one
respect, a closer connexion between the value of money and its quantity,
than between the values of other things and their quantity. The value of
other things conforms to the changes in the cost of production, without
requiring, as a condition, that there should be any actual alteration of
the supply: the potential alteration is sufficient; and if there even be
an actual alteration, it is but a temporary one, except in so far as the
altered Edition: current; Page: [522] value may make a difference in the
demand, and so require an increase or diminution of supply, as a
consequence, not a cause, of the alteration in value. Now this is also
true of gold and silver, considered as articles of expenditure for
ornament and luxury; but it is not true of money. If the apermanenta
cost of production of gold were reduced one-fourth, bit might happen
that there would not be more of it bought for plate, gilding, or
jewellery, than before; and if so, though the value would fall, the
quantity extracted from the mines for these purposes would be no greater
than previously. Not so with the portion used as money; that portion
could not fall in value one-fourth, unless actually increased
one-fourth; for, at prices one-fourth higher, one-fourth more money
would be required to make the accustomed purchases; and if this were not
forthcoming, some of the commodities would be without purchasers, and
prices could not be kept up. Alterations, therefore, in the cost of
production of the precious metals, do not act upon the value of money
except just in proportion as they increase or diminish its quantity;
which cannot be said of any other commodity. It would therefore, I
conceive, be an error both scientifically and practically, to discard
the proposition which asserts a connexion between the value of money and
its quantity.

It is evident, however, that the cost of production, in the long run,
regulates the quantity; and that every country (temporary fluctuations
excepted) will possess, and have in circulation, just that quantity of
money, which will perform all the exchanges required of it, consistently
with maintaining a value conformable to its cost of production. The
prices of things will, on the average, be such that money will exchange
for its own cost in all other goods: and, precisely because the quantity
cannot be prevented from affecting the value, the quantity itself will
c(by a sort of self-acting machinery)c be kept at the amount consistent
with that standard of prices—at the amount necessary for performing, at
those prices, all the business required of it.

“The quantity wanted will depend partly on the cost of producing gold,
and partly on the rapidity of its circulation. The rapidity of
circulation being given, it would depend on the cost of production: and
the cost of production being given, the quantity of money would depend
on the rapidity of its circulation.”* After what has been already said,
I hope that neither of these propositions stands in need of any further
illustration.

Edition: current; Page: [523]
Money, then, like commodities in general, having a value dependent on,
and proportional to, its cost of production; the theory of money is, by
the admission of this principle, stript of a great part of the mystery
which apparently surrounded it. We must not forget, however, that this
doctrine only applies to the places in which the precious metals are
actually produced; and that we have yet to enquire whether the law of
the dependence of value on cost of production applies to the exchange of
things produced at distant places. But however this may be, our
propositions with respect to value will require no other alteration,
where money is an imported commodity, than that of substituting for the
cost of its production, the cost of obtaining it in the country. Every
foreign commodity is bought by giving for it some domestic production;
and the labour and capital which a foreign commodity costs to us, is the
labour and capital expended in producing the quantity of our own goods
which we give in exchange for it. What this quantity depends upon,—what
determines the proportions of interchange between the productions of one
country and those of another,—is indeed a question of somewhat greater
complexity than those we have hitherto considered. But this at least is
indisputable, that within the country itself the value of imported
commodities is determined by the value, and consequently by the cost of
production, of the equivalent given for them; and money, where it is an
imported commodity, is subject to the same law.

Edition: current; Page: [524]


CHAPTER X: Of a Double Standard, and Subsidiary Coins

§ 1. [Objections to a double standard] Though the qualities necessary to
fit any commodity for being used as money are rarely united in any
considerable perfection, there are two commodities which possess them in
an eminent, and nearly an equal degree; the two precious metals, as they
are called; gold and silver. Some nations have accordingly attempted to
compose their circulating medium of these two metals indiscriminately.

There is an obvious convenience in making use of the more costly metal
for larger payments, and the cheaper one for smaller; and the only
question relates to the mode in which this can best be done. The mode
most frequently adopted has been to establish between the two metals a
fixed proportion; to decide, for example, that a gold coin called a
sovereign should be equivalent to twenty of the silver coins called
shillings: both the one and the other being called, in the ordinary
money of account of the country, by the same denomination, a pound: and
it being left free to every one who has a pound to pay, either to pay it
in the one metal or in the other.

At the time when the valuation of the two metals relatively to each
other, say twenty shillings to the sovereign, or twenty-one shillings to
the guinea, was first made, the proportion probably corresponded, as
nearly as it could be made to do, with the ordinary relative values of
the two metals grounded on their cost of production: and if those
natural or cost values always continued to bear the same ratio to one
another, the arrangement would be unobjectionable. This, however, is far
from being the fact. Gold and silver, though the least variable in value
of all commodities, are not invariable, and do not always vary
simultaneously. Silver, for example, was lowered in permanent value more
than gold, by the discovery of the American mines; and those small
variations of value which take place occasionally, do not affect both
metals alike. Suppose such a variation to take place: the value of the
two metals relatively to one another no longer agreeing with their rated
proportion, one or other of them will now be rated below its bullion
value, and there will be a profit to be made by melting it.

Edition: current; Page: [525]
Suppose, for example, that gold rises in value relatively to silver, so
that the quantity of gold in a sovereign is now worth more than the
quantity of silver in twenty shillings. Two consequences will ensue. No
debtor will any longer find it his interest to pay in gold. He will
always pay in silver, because twenty shillings are a legal tender for a
debt of one pound, and he can procure silver convertible into twenty
shillings for less gold than that contained in a sovereign. The other
consequence will be, that unless a sovereign can be sold for more than
twenty shillings, all the sovereigns will be melted, since as bullion
they will purchase a greater number of shillings than they exchange for
as coin. The converse of all this would happen if silver, instead of
gold, were the metal which had risen in comparative value. A sovereign
would not now be worth so much as twenty shillings, and whoever had a
pound to pay would prefer paying it by a sovereign; while the silver
coins would be collected for the purpose of being melted, and sold as
bullion for gold at their real value, that is, above the legal
valuation. The money of the community, therefore, would never really
consist of both metals, but of the one only which, at the particular
time, best suited the interest of debtors; and the standard of the
currency would be constantly liable to change from the one metal to the
other, at a lossa, on each change, of the expense of coinage on the
metal which fell out of use.

It appears, therefore, that the value of money is liable to more
frequent fluctuations when both metals are a legal tender at a fixed
valuation, than when the exclusive standard of the currency is either
gold or silver. Instead of being only affected by variations in the cost
of production of one metal, it is subject to derangement from those of
two. The particular kind of variation to which a currency is rendered
more liable by having two legal standards, is a fall of value, or what
is commonly called a depreciation; since practically that one of the two
metals will always be the standard, of which the real has fallen below
the rated value. If the tendency of the metals be to rise in value, all
payments will be made in the one which has risen least; and if to fall,
then in that which has fallen most.

§ 2. [How the use of the two metals as money is obtained without making
both of them legal tender] The plan of a double standard is still
occasionally brought forward by here and there a writer or orator as a
great improvement in currency. It is probable that, with most of its
adherents, its chief merit is its tendency to a sort of depreciation,
there being at all times abundance of supporters for any mode, either
open or covert, of lowering the standard. Some, however, are influenced
by an exaggerated estimate of an advantage which to a certain extent is
real, that of being able to have recourse, for replenishing the
circulation, to the united stock of gold Edition: current; Page: [526]
and silver in the commercial world, instead of being confined to one of
them, which, from accidental absorption, may not be obtainable with
sufficient rapidity. The advantage without the disadvantages of a double
standard, seems to be best obtained by those nations with whom one only
of the two metals is a legal tender, but the other also is coined, and
allowed to pass for whatever value the market assigns to it.a

When this plan is adopted, it is naturally the more costly metal which
is left to be bought and sold as an article of commerce. But nations
which, like England, adopt the more costly of the two as their standard,
resort to a different expedient for retaining them both in circulation,
namely, to make silver a legal tender, but only for small payments. In
England, no one can be compelled to receive silver in payment for a
larger amount than forty shillings. With this regulation there is
necessarily combined another, namely, that silver coin should be rated,
in comparison with gold, somewhat above its intrinsic value; that there
should not be, in twenty shillings, as much silver as is worth a
sovereign: for if there were, a very slight turn of the market in its
favour would make it worth more than a sovereign, and it would be
profitable to melt the silver coin. The over-valuation of the silver
coin creates an inducement to buy silver and send it to the Mint to be
coined, since it is bgivenb back at a higher value than properly belongs
to it: this, however, has been guarded against, by limiting the quantity
of the silver coinage, which is not left, like that of gold, to the
discretion of individuals, but is determined by the government, and
restricted to the amount supposed to be required for small payments. The
only precaution necessary is, not to put so high a valuation upon the
silver, as to hold out a strong temptation to private coining.

Edition: current; Page: [527]


CHAPTER XI: Of Credit, as a Substitute for Money

§ 1. [Credit is not a creation but a transfer of the means of
production] The functions of credit have been a subject of as much
misunderstanding and as much confusion of ideas, as any single topic in
Political Economy. This is not owing to any peculiar difficulty in the
theory of the subject, but to the complex nature of some of the
mercantile phenomena arising from the forms in which credit clothes
itself; by which attention is diverted from the properties of credit in
general, to the peculiarities of its particular forms.

As a specimen of the confused notions entertained respecting the nature
of credit, we may advert to the exaggerated language so often used
respecting its national importance. Credit has a great, but not, as many
people seem to suppose, a magical power; it cannot make something out of
nothing. How often is an extension of credit talked of as equivalent to
a creation of capital, or as if credit actually were capital. It seems
strange that there should be any need to point out, that credit being
only permission to use the capital of another person, the means of
production cannot be increased by it, but only transferred. If the
borrower’s means of production and of employing labour are increased by
the credit given him, the lender’s are as much diminished. The same sum
cannot be used as capital both by the owner and also by the person to
whom it is lent: it cannot supply its aentirea value in wages, tools,
and materials, to two sets of labourers at once. It is true that the
capital which A has borrowed from B, and makes use of in his business,
still forms part of the wealth of B for other purposes: he can enter
into barrangementsb in reliance on it, and can cborrow, when needful, an
equivalent sum on the security of it; so that to a superficial eye it
might seem as if both B and A had the use of it at once. But the
smallest consideration will show that when B has parted with his capital
to A, the use of it as capital rests with A alone, and that B Edition:
current; Page: [528] has no other service from it than in so far as his
ultimate claim upon it serves him to obtain the use of another capital
from a third person C. All capital (not his own) of which any person has
really the use, is, and must be, so much subtracted from the capital of
some one else.*

§ 2. [In what manner credit assists production] But though credit is
abuta a transfer of capital from hand to hand, it is generally, and
naturally, a transfer to hands more competent to employ the capital
efficiently in production. If there were no such thing as credit, or if,
from general insecurity and want of confidence, it were scantily
practised, many persons who possess more or less of capital, but who,
from their occupations, or for want of the necessary skill and
knowledge, cannot personally superintend its employment, would derive no
benefit from it: their funds would either lie idle, or would be,
perhaps, wasted and annihilated in unskilful attempts to make them yield
a profit. All this capital is now lent at interest, and made available
for production. Capital thus circumstanced forms a large portion of the
productive resources of any commercial country; and is naturally
attracted to those producers or traders who, being in the greatest
business, have the means of employing it to most advantage; because such
are both the most desirous to obtain it, and able to give the best
security. Although, therefore, the productive funds of the country
Edition: current; Page: [529] are not increased by credit, they are
called into a more complete state of productive activity. As the
confidence on which credit is grounded extends itself, means are
developed by which even the smallest portions of capital, the sums which
each person keeps by him to meet contingencies, are made available for
productive uses. The principal instruments for this purpose are banks of
deposit. Where these do not exist, a prudent person must keep a
sufficient sum unemployed in his own possession, to meet every demand
which he has even a slight reason for thinking himself liable to. When
the practice, however, has grown up of keeping this reserve not in his
own custody but with a banker, many small sums, previously lying idle,
become aggregated in the banker’s hands; and the banker, being taught by
experience what proportion of the amount is likely to be wanted in a
given time, and knowing that if one depositor happens to require more
than the average, another will require less, is able to lend the
remainder, that is, the far greater part, to producers and dealers:
thereby adding the amount, not indeed to the capital in existence, but
to that in employment, and making a corresponding addition to the
aggregate production of the community.

While credit is thus indispensable for rendering the whole capital of
the country productive, it is also bab means by which the industrial
talent of the country is turned to cbetterc account for purposes of
production. Many a person who has either no capital of his own, or very
little, but who has qualifications for business which are known and
appreciated by some dpossessorsd of capital, is enabled to obtain either
advances in money, or more frequently goods on credit, by which his
industrial capacities are made instrumental to the increase of the
public wealth; and this benefit will be reaped far more largely,
whenever, through better laws and better education, the community shall
have made such progress in integrity, that personal character can be
accepted as a sufficient guarantee not only against dishonestly
appropriating, but against dishonestly risking, what belongs to another.

Such are, in the most general point of view, the uses of credit to the
productive resources of the world. But these considerations only apply
to the credit given to the industrious classes—to producers and dealers.
Credit given ebye dealers to unproductive consumers is never an
addition, but always a detriment, to the sources of public wealth. It
makes over in temporary use, not the capital of the unproductive classes
to the productive, but that of the productive to the unproductive. If A,
a dealer, supplies goods to B, a landowner or annuitant, to be paid for
at the end of five years, as much of the capital of A as is equal to the
value of these Edition: current; Page: [530] goods, remains for five
years unproductive. During such a period, if payment had been made at
once, the sum might have been several times expended and replaced, and
goods to the amount might have been several times produced, consumed,
and reproduced: consequently B’s withholding 100l. for five years, even
if he pays at last, has cost to the labouring classes of the community
during that period an absolute loss of probably several times that
amount. A, individually, is compensated, by putting a higher price upon
his goods, which is ultimately paid by B: but there is no compensation
made to the labouring classes, the chief sufferers by every diversion of
capital, whether permanently or temporarily, to unproductive uses. The
country has had 100l. less of capital during those five years, B having
taken that amount from A’s capital, and spent it unproductively, in
anticipation of his own means, and having only after five years set
apart a sum from his income and converted it into capital for the
purpose of indemnifying A.

§ 3. [Function of credit in economizing the use of money] Thus far of
the general functions of Credit in production. It is not a productive
power in itself, though, without it, the productive powers already
existing could not be brought into complete employment. But a more
intricate portion of the theory of Credit is its influence on prices;
the chief cause of most of the mercantile phenomena which perplex
observers. In a state of commerce in which much credit is habitually
given, general prices at any moment depend much more upon the state of
credit than upon the quantity of money. For credit, though it is not
productive power, is purchasing power; and a person who, having credit,
avails himself of it in the purchase of goods, creates just as much
demand for the goods, and tends quite as much to raise their price, as
if he made an equal amount of purchases with ready money.

The credit which we are now called upon to consider, as a distinct
purchasing power, independent of money, is of course not credit in its
simplest form, that of money lent by one person to another, and paid
directly into his hands; for when the borrower expends this in
purchases, he makes the purchases with money, not credit, and exerts no
purchasing power over and above that conferred by the money. The forms
of credit which create purchasing power, are those in which no money
passes at the time, and very often anone passesa at all, the transaction
being included with a mass of other transactions in an account, and
nothing paid but a balance. This takes place in a variety of ways, which
we shall proceed to examine, beginning, as is our custom, with the
simplest.

First: Suppose A and B to be two dealers, who have transactions with
Edition: current; Page: [531] each other both as buyers and as sellers.
A buys from B on credit. B does the like with respect to A. At the end
of the year, the sum of A’s debts to B is set against the sum of B’s
debts to A, and it is ascertained to which side a balance is due. This
balance, which may be less than the amount of many of the transactions
singly, and is necessarily less than the sum of the transactions, is all
that is paid in money; and perhaps even this is not paid, but carried
over in an account current to the next year. A single payment of a
hundred pounds may in this manner suffice to liquidate a long series of
transactions, some of them to the value of thousands.

But secondly: The debts of A to B may be paid without the intervention
of money, even though there be no reciprocal debts of B to A. A may
satisfy B by making over to him a debt due to himself from a third
person, C. This is conveniently done by means of a written instrument,
called a bill of exchange, which is, in fact, a transferable order by a
creditor upon his debtor, and when bacceptedb by the debtor, that is
authenticated by his signature, becomes an acknowledgment of debt.

§ 4. [Bills of exchange] Bills of exchange were first introduced to save
the expense and risk of transporting the precious metals from place to
place. “Let it be supposed,” says Mr. Henry Thornton,* “that there are
in London ten manufacturers who sell their article to ten shopkeepers in
York, by whom it is retailed; and that there are in York ten
manufacturers of another commodity, who sell it to ten shopkeepers in
London. There would be no occasion for the ten shopkeepers in London to
send yearly to York guineas for the payment of the York manufacturers,
and for the ten York shopkeepers to send yearly as many guineas to
London. It would only be necessary for the York manufacturers to receive
from each of the shopkeepers at their own door the money in question,
giving in return letters which should acknowledge the receipt of it; and
which should also direct the money, lying ready in the hands of their
debtors in London, to be paid to the London manufacturers, so as to
cancel the debt in London in the same manner as that at York. The
expense and the risk of all transmission of money would thus be saved.
Letters ordering the transfer of the debt are termed, in the language of
the present day, bills of exchange. They are bills by which the debt of
one person is exchanged for the debt of another; and the debt, perhaps,
which is due in one place, for the debt due in another.”

Edition: current; Page: [532]
Bills of exchange having been found convenient as means of paying debts
at distant places without the expense of transporting the precious
metals, their use was afterwards greatly extended from another motive.
It is usual in every trade to give a certain length of credit for goods
bought: three months, six months, a year, even two years, according to
the convenience or custom of the particular trade. A dealer who has sold
goods, for which he is to be paid in six months, but who desires to
receive apaymenta sooner, draws a bill on his debtor payable in six
months, and gets the bill discounted by a banker or other money-lender,
that is, transfers the bill to him, receiving the amount, minus interest
for the time it has still to run. It has become one of the chief
functions of bills of exchange to serve as a means by which a debt due
from one person can thus be made available for obtaining credit from
another. The convenience of the expedient has led to the frequent
creation of bills of exchange not grounded on any debt previously due to
the drawer of the bill by the person on whom it is drawn. These are
called accommodation bills; and sometimes, with a tinge of
disapprobation, fictitious bills. Their nature is so clearly stated, and
with such judicious remarks, by the author whom I have just quoted, that
I shall transcribe the entire passage.*

“A, being in want of 100l., requests B to accept a note or bill drawn at
two months, which B, therefore, on the face of it, is bound to pay; it
is understood, however, that A will take care either to discharge the
bill himself, or to furnish B with the means of paying it. A obtains
ready money for the bill on the joint credit of the two parties. A
fulfils his promise of paying it when due, and thus concludes the
transaction. This service rendered by B to A is, however, not unlikely
to be requited, at a more or less distant period, by a similar
acceptance of a bill on A, drawn and discounted for B’s convenience.

“Let us now compare such a bill with a real bill. Let us consider in
what points they differ, or seem to differ; and in what they agree.

“They agree, inasmuch as each is a discountable article; each has also
been created for the purpose of being discounted; and each is, perhaps,
discounted in fact. Each, therefore, serves equally to supply means of
speculation to the merchant. So far, moreover, as bills and notes
constitute what is called the circulating medium, or paper currency of
the country, and prevent the use of guineas, the fictitious and the real
bill are upon an equality; and if the price of commodities be raised in
proportion to the quantity of paper currency, the one contributes to
that rise exactly in the same manner as the other.

“Before we come to the points in which they differ, let us advert to
Edition: current; Page: [533] one point in which they are commonly
supposed to be unlike; but in which they cannot be said always or
necessarily to differ.

“Real notes (it is sometimes said) represent actual property. There are
actual goods in existence, which are the counterpart to every real note.
Notes which are not drawn in consequence of a sale of goods, are a
species of false wealth, by which a nation is deceived. These supply
only an imaginary capital; the others indicate one that is real.

“In answer to this statement it may be observed, first, that the notes
given in consequence of a real sale of goods cannot be considered as on
that account certainly representing any actual property. Suppose that A
sells 100l. worth of goods to B at six months’ credit, and takes a bill
at six months for it; and that B, within a month after, sells the same
goods, at a like credit, to C, taking a like bill; and again, that C,
after another month, sells them to D, taking a like bill, and so on.
There may then, at the end of six months, be six bills of 100l. each,
existing at the same time; and every one of these may possibly have been
discounted. Of all these bills, then, only one represents any actual
property.

“In order to justify the supposition that a real bill (as it is called)
represents actual property, there ought to be some power in the
bill-holder to prevent the property which the bill represents, from
being turned to other purposes than that of paying the bill in question.
No such power exists; neither the man who holds the real bill, nor the
man who discounts it, has any property in the specific goods for which
it was given: he as much trusts to the general ability to pay of the
giver of the bill, as the holder of any fictitious bill does. The
fictitious bill may, in many cases, be a bill given by a person having a
large and known capital, a part of which the fictitious bill may be said
in that case to represent. The supposition that real bills represent
property, and that fictitious bills do not, seems, therefore, to be one
by which more than justice is done to one of these species of bills, and
something less than justice to the other.

“We come next to some point in which they differ.

“First, the fictitious note, or note of accommodation, is liable to the
objection that it professes to be what it is not. This objection,
however, lies only against those fictitious bills which are passed as
real. In many cases it is sufficiently obvious what they are. Secondly,
the fictitious bill is, in general, less likely to be punctually paid
than the real one. There is a general presumption, that the dealer in
fictitious bills is a man who is a more adventurous speculator than he
who carefully abstains from them. It follows, thirdly, that fictitious
bills, besides being less safe, are less subject to limitation as to
their quantity. The extent of a man’s actual sales forms some limit to
the amount of his real notes; and as it is highly desirable in commerce
that credit should be dealt out to all persons in Edition: current;
Page: [534] some sort of regular and due proportion, the measure of a
man’s actual sales, certified by the appearance of his bills drawn in
virtue of those sales, is some rule in the case, though a very imperfect
one in many respects.

“A fictitious bill, or bill of accommodation, is evidently in substance
the same as any common promissory note; and even better in this respect,
that there is but one security to the promissory note, whereas in the
case of the bill of accommodation, there are two. So much jealousy
subsists lest traders should push their means of raising money too far,
that paper, the same in its general nature with that which is given,
being the only paper which can be given, by men out of business, is
deemed somewhat discreditable when coming from a merchant. And because
such paper, when in the merchant’s hand, necessarily imitates the paper,
which passes on the occasion of a sale of goods, the epithet fictitious
has been cast upon it; an epithet which has seemed to countenance the
confused and mistaken notion, that there is something altogether false
and delusive in the nature of a certain part both of the paper and of
the apparent wealth of the country.”

A bill of exchange, when merely discounted, and kept in the portfolio of
the discounter until it falls due, does not perform the functions or
supply the place of money, but is itself bought and sold for money. It
is no more currency than the public funds, or any other securities. But
when a bill drawn upon one person is paid to another (or even to the
same person) in discharge of a debt or a pecuniary claim, it does
something for which, if the bill did not exist, money would be required:
it performs the functions of currency. This is a use to which bills of
exchange are often applied. “They not only,” continues Mr. Thornton,*
“spare the use of ready money; they also occupy its place in many cases.
Let us imagine a farmer in the country to discharge a debt of 10l. to
his neighbouring grocer, by giving him a bill for that sum, drawn on his
cornfactor in London for grain sold in the metropolis; and the grocer to
transmit the bill, he having previously indorsed it to a neighbouring
sugar-baker, in discharge of a like debt; and the sugar-baker to send
it, when again indorsed, to a West India merchant in an outport, and the
West India merchant to deliver it to his country banker, who also
indorses it, and sends it into further circulation. The bill in this
case will have effected five payments, exactly as if it were a 10l. note
payable to bab bearer on demand. A multitude of bills pass between
trader and trader in the country, in the manner which has been
described; and they evidently form, in the strictest sense, a part of
the circulating medium of the kingdom.”

Edition: current; Page: [535]
Many bills, both domestic and foreign, are at least presented for
payment quite covered with indorsements, each of which represents either
a fresh discounting, or a pecuniary transaction in which the bill has
performed the functions of money. cWithin the present generationc, the
circulating medium of Lancashire for sums above five pounds, was almost
entirely composed of such bills.

§ 5. [Promissory notes] A third form in which credit is employed as a
substitute for currency, is that of promissory notes. A bill drawn upon
any one and accepted by him, and a note of hand by him promising to pay
the same sum, are, as far as he is concerned, exactly equivalent, except
that the former commonly bears interest and the latter generally does
nota; and that the former is commonly payable only after a certain lapse
of time, and the latter payable at sighta. But it is chiefly in the
latter form that it has become in commercial countries, an express
occupation to issue such substitutes for money. Dealers in money (as
lenders by profession are improperly called) desire, like other dealers,
to stretch their operations beyond what can be carried on by their own
means: they wish to lend, not their capital merely, but their credit,
and not only such portion of their credit as consists of funds actually
deposited with them, but their power of obtaining credit from the public
generally, so far as they think they can safely employ it. This is done
in a very convenient manner by lending their own promissory notes
payable to bearer on demand: the borrower being willing to accept these
as so much money, because the credit of the lender makes other people
willingly receive them on the same footing, in purchases or other
payments. These notes, therefore, perform all the functions of currency,
and render an equivalent amount of money which was previously in
circulation, unnecessary. As, however, being payable on demand, they may
be at any time returned on the issuer, and money demanded for them, he
must, on pain of bankruptcy, keep by him as much money as will enable
him to meet any claims of that sort which can be expected to occur
within the time necessary for providing himself with more: and prudence
also requires that he should not attempt to issue notes beyond the
amount which experience shows can remain in circulation without being
presented for payment.

The convenience of this mode of (as it were) coining credit, having once
been discovered, governments have availed themselves of the same
expedient, and have issued their own promissory notes in payment of
their expenses; a resource the more useful, because it is the only mode
in which they are able to borrow money without paying interest, their
promises to Edition: current; Page: [536] pay on demand being, in the
estimation of the holders, equivalent to money in hand. The practical
differences between such government notes and the issues of private
bankers, and the further diversities of which this class of substitutes
for money are susceptible, will be considered presently.

§ 6. [Deposits and cheques] A fourth mode of making credit answer the
purposes of money, by which, when carried far enough, money may be very
completely superseded, consists in making payments by cheques. The
custom of keeping the spare cash reserved for immediate use or against
contingent demands, in the hands of a banker, and making all payments,
except small ones, by orders on bankers, is in this country spreading to
a continually larger portion of the public. If the person making the
payment, and the person receiving it, akeepa their money with the same
banker, the payment btakesb place without any intervention of money, by
the mere transfer of its amount in the banker’s books from the credit of
the payer to that of the receiver. If all persons in London kept their
cash at the same banker’s and made all their payments by means of
cheques, no money would be required or used for any transactions
beginning and terminating in London. This ideal limit is almost attained
in fact, so far as regards transactions between dealers. It is chiefly
in the retail transactions between dealers and consumers, and in the
payment of wages, that money or bank notes now pass, and then only when
the amounts are small. In London, even shopkeepers of any amount of
capital or extent of business have generally an account with a banker;
which, besides the safety and convenience of the practice, is to their
advantage in another respect, by giving them an understood claim to have
their bills discounted in cases when they could not otherwise expect it.
As for the merchants and larger dealers, they habitually make all
payments in the course of their business by cheques. They do not,
however, all deal with the same banker, and when A gives a cheque to B,
B usually pays it not into the same but into some other bank. But the
convenience of business has given birth to an arrangement which makes
all the banking houses of the City of London, for certain purposes,
virtually one establishment. A banker does not send the cheques which
are paid into his banking house, to the banks on which they are drawn,
and demand money for them. There is a building called the
Clearing-house, to which every City banker sends, each afternoon, all
the cheques on other bankers which he has received during the day, and
they are there exchanged for the cheques on him which have come into the
hands of other bankers, the balances only being paid in moneyc; or even
these not in money, but in cheques on the Bank of Englandc. By this
contrivance, all the business Edition: current; Page: [537] transactions
of the City of London during that day, amounting often to millions of
pounds, and a vast amount besides of country transactions, represented
by bills which country bankers have drawn upon their London
correspondents, are liquidated by payments not exceeding on the average
200,000l.*

By means of the various instruments of credit which have now been
explained, the immense business of a country like Great Britain is
transacted with an amount of the precious metals surprisingly small;
many times smaller, in proportion to the pecuniary value of the
commodities bought and sold, than is found necessary in France, or any
other country in which, the habit and the disposition to give credit not
being so generally diffused, these “economizing expedients,” as they
have been called, are not practised to the same extent. What becomes of
the money thus superseded in its functions, and by what process it is
made to disappear from circulation, are questions the discussion of
which must be for a short time postponed.

Edition: current; Page: [538]


CHAPTER XII: Influence of Credit on Prices

§ 1. [The influence of bank notes, bills, and cheques, on price is a
part of the influence of Credit] Having now formed a general idea of the
modes in which credit is made available as a substitute for money, we
have to consider in what manner the use of these substitutes affects the
value of money, or, what is equivalent, the prices of commodities. It is
hardly necessary to say that the permanent value of money—the natural
and average prices of commodities—are not in question here. These are
determined by the cost of producing or of obtaining the precious metals.
An ounce of gold or silver will in the long run exchange for as much of
every other commodity, as can be produced or imported at the same cost
with itself. And an order, or note of hand, or bill payable at sight,
for an ounce of gold, while the credit of the giver is unimpaired, is
worth neither more nor less than the gold itself.

It is not, however, with ultimate or average, but with immediate and
temporary prices, that we are now concerned. These, as we have seen, may
deviate very widely from the standard of cost of production. Among other
causes of fluctuation, one we have found to be, the quantity of money in
circulation. Other things being the same, an increase of the money in
circulation raises prices, a diminution lowers them. If more money is
thrown into circulation than the quantity which can circulate at a value
conformable to its cost of production, the value of money, so long as
the excess lasts, will remain below the standard of cost of production,
and general prices will be sustained above the natural rate.

But we have now found that there are other things, such as bank notes,
bills of exchange, and cheques, which circulate as money, and perform
all the functions of it: and the question arises, Do these various
substitutes operate on prices in the same manner as money itself? Does
an increase in the quantity of transferable paper tend to raise prices,
in the same manner and degree as an increase in the quantity of money?
There has been no small amount of discussion on this point among writers
on currency, without any result so conclusive as to have yet obtained
general assent.

I apprehend that bank notes, bills, or cheques, as such, do not act on
prices at all. What does act on prices is Credit, in whatever shape
given, Edition: current; Page: [539] and whether it gives rise to any
transferable instruments capable of passing into circulation, or not.

I proceed to explain and substantiate this opinion.

§ 2. [Credit is a purchasing power similar to money] Money acts upon
prices in no other way than by being tendered in exchange for
commodities. The demand which influences the prices of commodities
consists of the money offered for them. But the money offered, is not
the same thing with the money possessed. It is sometimes less, sometimes
very much more. In the long run indeed, the money which people lay out
will be neither more nor less than the money which they have to lay out:
but this is far from being the case at any given time. Sometimes they
keep money by them for fear of an emergency, or in expectation of a more
advantageous opportunity for expending it. In that case the money is
said not to be in circulation: in plainer language, it is not offered,
nor about to be offered, for commodities. Money not in circulation has
no effect on prices. The converse, however, is a much commoner case;
people make purchases with money not in their possession. An article,
for instance, which is paid for by a cheque on a banker, is bought with
money which not only is not in the payer’s possession, but generally not
even in the banker’s, having been lent by him (all but the usual
reserve) to other persons. We just now made the imaginary supposition
that all persons dealt with a bank, and all with the same bank, payments
being universally made by cheques. In this ideal case, there would be no
money anywhere except in the hands of the banker: who might then safely
part with all of it, by selling it as bullion, or lending it, to be sent
out of the country in exchange for goods or foreign securities. But
though there would then be no money in possession, or ultimately perhaps
even in existence, money would be offered, and commodities bought with
it, just as at present. People would continue to reckon their incomes
and their capitals in money, and to make their usual purchases with
orders for the receipt of a thing which would have literally ceased to
exist. There would be in all this nothing to complain of, so long as the
money, in disappearing, left aan equivalent value in other things,
applicable when required to the reimbursement of those to whom the money
originally belonged.

In the case however of payment by cheques, the purchases are at any rate
made, though not with money in the buyer’s possession, yet with money to
which he has a right. But he may make purchases with money which he only
expects to have, or even only pretends to expect. He may obtain goods in
return for his acceptances payable at a future time; or on his note of
hand; or on a simple book credit, that is, on a mere promise Edition:
current; Page: [540] to pay. All these purchases have exactly the same
effect on price, as if they were made with ready money. The amount of
purchasing power which a person can exercise is composed of all the
money in his possession or due to him, and of all his credit. For
exercising the whole of this power he finds a sufficient motive only
under peculiar circumstances; but he always possesses it; and the
portion of it which he at any time does exercise, is the measure of the
effect which he produces on price.

Suppose that, in the expectation that some commodity will rise in price,
he determines, not only to invest in it all his ready money, but to take
up on credit, from the producers or importers, as much of it as their
opinion of his resources will enable him to obtain. Every one must see
that by thus acting he produces a greater effect on price, than if he
limited his purchases to the money he has actually in hand. He creates a
demand for the article to the full amount of his money and credit taken
together, and raises the price proportionally to both. And this effect
is produced, though none of the written instruments called substitutes
for currency may be called into existence; though the transaction may
give rise to no bill of exchange, nor to the issue of a single bank
note. The buyer, instead of taking a mere book credit, might have given
a bill for the amount; or might have paid for the goods with bank notes
borrowed for that purpose from a banker, thus making the purchase not on
his own credit with the seller, but on the banker’s credit with the
seller, and his own with the banker. Had he done so, he would have
produced as great an effect on price as by a simple purchase to the same
amount on a book credit, but no greater effect. The credit itself, not
the form and mode in which it is given, is the operating cause.

§ 3. [Effects of great extensions and contractions of credit. Phenomena
of a commercial crisis analyzed] The inclination of the mercantile
public to increase their demand for commodities by making use of all or
much of their credit as a purchasing power, depends on their expectation
of profit. When there is a general impression that the price of some
commodity is likely to rise, from an extra demand, a short crop,
obstructions to importation, or any other cause, there is a disposition
among dealers to increase their stocks, in order to profit by the
expected rise. This disposition tends in itself to produce the effect
which it looks forward to, a rise of price: and if the rise is
considerable and progressive, other speculators are attracted, who, so
long as the price has not begun to fall, are willing to believe that it
will continue rising. These, by further purchases, produce a further
advance: and thus a rise of price for which there were originally some
rational grounds, is often heightened by merely speculative purchases,
until it greatly exceeds what the original grounds will justify.
Edition: current; Page: [541] After a time this begins to be perceived;
the price ceases to rise, and the holders, thinking it atime to realize
their gains, are anxious to sell. Then the price begins to decline: the
holders rush into the market to avoid a still greater loss, and, few
being willing to buy in a falling market, the price falls much more
suddenly than it rose. Those who have bought at a higher price than
reasonable calculation justified, and who have been overtaken by the
revulsion before they had realized, are losers in proportion to the
greatness of the fall, and to the quantity of the commodity which they
hold, or have bound themselves to pay for.

Now all these effects might take place in a community to which credit
was unknown: the prices of some commodities might rise from speculation,
to an extravagant height, and then fall rapidly back. But if there were
no such thing as credit, this could hardly happen with respect to
commodities generally. If all purchases were made with ready money, the
payment of increased prices for some articles would draw an unusual
proportion of the money of the community into the markets for those
articles, and must therefore draw it away from some other class of
commodities, and thus lower their prices. The vacuum might, it is true,
be partly filled up by increased rapidity of circulation; and in bthis
mannerb the money of the community cisc virtually increased in a time of
speculative activity, because people keep little of it by them, but
hasten to lay it out in some tempting adventure as soon as possible
after they receive it. This resource, however, is limited: on the whole,
people cannot, while the quantity of money remains the same, lay out
much more of it in some things, without laying out less in others. But
what they cannot do by ready money, they can do by an extension of
credit. When people go into the market and purchase with money which
they hope to receive hereafter, they are drawing upon an unlimited, not
a limited fund. Speculation, thus supported, may be going on in any
number of commodities, without disturbing the regular course of business
in others. It might even be going on in all commodities at once. We
could imagine that in an epidemic fit of the passion of gambling, all
dealers, instead of giving only their accustomed orders to the
manufacturers or growers of their commodity, commenced buying up all of
it which they could procure, as far as their capital and credit would
go. All prices would rise enormously, even if there dwered no increase
of money, and no paper credit, but a mere extension of purchases on book
credits. After a time those who had bought would wish to sell, and
prices would collapse.

This is the ideal extreme case of what is called a commercial crisis.
There is said to be a commercial crisis, when a great number of
merchants Edition: current; Page: [542] and traders at once, either
have, or apprehend that they shall have, a difficulty in meeting their
engagements. The most usual cause of this general embarrassment, is the
recoil of prices after they have been raised by a spirit of speculation,
intense in degree, and extending to many commodities. Some accident
which excites expectations of rising prices, such as the opening of a
new foreign market, or simultaneous indications of a short supply of
several great articles of commerce, sets speculation at work in several
leading departments at once. The prices rise, and the holders realize,
or appear to have the power of realizing, great gains. In certain states
of the public mind, such examples of rapid increase of fortune call
forth numerous imitators, and speculation not only goes much beyond what
is justified by the original grounds for expecting rise of price, but
extends itself to articles in which there never was any such ground:
these, however, rise like the rest as soon as speculation sets in. At
periods of this kind, a great extension of credit takes place. Not only
do all whom the contagion reaches, employ their credit much more freely
than usual; but they really have more credit, because they seem to be
making unusual gains, and because a generally reckless and adventurous
feeling prevails, which disposes people to give as well as take credit
more largely than at other times, and give it to persons not entitled to
it. In this manner, in the celebrated speculative year 1825, and at
various other periods during the present century, the prices of many of
the principal articles of commerce rose greatly, without any fall in
others, so that general prices might, without incorrectness, be said to
have risen. When, after such a rise, the reaction comes, and prices
begin to fall, though at first perhaps only through the desire of the
holders to realize, speculative purchases cease: but were this all,
prices would only fall to the level from which they rose, or to that
which is justified by the state of the consumption and of the supply.
They fall, however, much lower; for as, when prices were rising, and
everybody apparently making a fortune, it was easy to obtain almost any
amount of credit, so now, when everybody seems to be losing, and many
fail entirely, it is with difficulty that firms of known solidity can
obtain even the credit to which they are accustomed, and which it is the
greatest inconvenience to them to be without; because all dealers have
engagements to fulfil, and nobody feeling sure that the portion of his
means which he has entrusted to others will be available in time, no one
likes to part with ready money, or to postpone his claim to it. To these
rational considerations there is superadded, in extreme cases, a panic
as unreasoning as the previous overconfidence; money is borrowed for
short periods at almost any rate of interest, and sales of goods for
immediate payment are made at almost any sacrifice. Thus general prices,
during a commercial revulsion, fall as much below the usual level, as
during the previous period of speculation Edition: current; Page: [543]
they ehavee risen above it: the fall, as well as the rise, originating
not in anything affecting money, but in the state of credit; an
unusually extended employment of credit during the earlier period,
followed by a great diminution, never amounting however to an entire
cessation of it, in the later.

It is not, however, universally true that the contraction of credit,
characteristic of a commercial crisis, must have been preceded by an
extraordinary and irrational extension of it. There are other causes;
and fone of the moref recent gcrisesg, that of 1847, is an instance,
having been preceded by no particular extension of credit, and by no
speculations; except those in railway shares, which, though in many
cases extravagant enough, yet being carried on mostly with that portion
of means which the speculators could afford to lose, were not calculated
to produce the widespread ruin which arises from vicissitudes of price
in the commodities in which men habitually deal, and in which the bulk
of their capital is invested. The crisis of 1847 belonged to another
class of mercantile phenomena. There occasionally happens a concurrence
of circumstances tending to withdraw from the loan market a considerable
portion of the capital which usually supplies it. These circumstances,
in the present case, were great foreign payments, (occasioned by hah
high price of cotton and iani unprecedented importation of food,)
together with the continual demands on the circulating capital of the
country by railway calls and the loan transactions of railway companies,
for the purpose of being converted into fixed capital and made
unavailable for future lending. These various demands fell principally,
as such demands always do, on the loan market. A great, though not the
greatest part of the imported food, was actually paid for by the
proceeds of a government loan. The extra payments which purchasers of
corn and cotton, and railway shareholders, found themselves obliged to
make, were either made with their own spare cash, or with money raised
for the occasion. On the first supposition, they were made by
withdrawing deposits from bankers, and thus cutting off a part of the
streams which fed the loan market; on the second supposition, they were
made by actual drafts on the loan market, either by the sale of
securities, or by taking up money at interest. This combination of a
fresh demand for loans, with a curtailment of the capital disposable for
them, raised the rate of interest, and made it impossible to borrow
except on the very best security. Some firms, therefore, which by an
improvident and unmercantile mode of conducting business had allowed
their capital to become either temporarily or permanently unavailable,
became unable Edition: current; Page: [544] to command that perpetual
renewal of credit which had previously enabled them to struggle on.
These firms stopped payment: their failure involved more or less deeply
many other firms which had trusted them; and, as usual in such cases,
the general distrust, commonly called a panic, began to set in, and
might have produced a destruction of credit equal to that of 1825, had
not circumstances which may almost be called accidental, given to a very
simple measure of the government j(the suspension of the Bank Charter
Act of 1844)j a fortunate power of allaying panic, to which, when
considered in itself, it had no sort of claim.*

§ 4. [Bills are a more powerful instrument for acting on prices than
book credits, and bank notes than bills] The general operation of credit
upon prices being such as we have described, it is evident that if any
particular mode or form of credit is calculated to have a greater
operation on prices than others, it can only be by giving greater
facility, or greater encouragement, to the multiplication of credit
transactions generally. If bank notes, for instance, or bills, have a
greater effect on prices than book credits, it is not by any difference
in the transactions themselves, which are essentially the same, whether
taking place in the one way or in the other: it must be that there are
likely to be more of them. If credit is likely to be more extensively
used as a purchasing power when bank notes or bills are the instruments
used, than when the credit is given by mere entries in an account, to
that extent and no more there is ground for ascribing to the former a
greater power over the markets than belongs to the latter.

Now it appears that there is some such distinction. As far as respects
the particular atransactionsa, it makes no difference in the effect on
price whether A buys goods of B on simple credit, or gives a bill for
them, or pays for them with bank notes lent to him by a banker C. The
difference is in a subsequent stage. If A has bought the goods on a book
credit, there is no obvious or convenient mode by which B can make A’s
debt to him a means of extending his own credit. Whatever credit he has,
will be due to the general opinion entertained of his solvency; he
cannot specifically pledge A’s debt to a third person, as a security for
money lent or goods bought. But if A has given him a bill for the
amount, he can get this discounted, which is the same thing as borrowing
money on the joint credit Edition: current; Page: [545] of A and
himself: or he may pay away the bill in exchange for goods, which is
obtaining goods on the same joint credit. In either case, here is a
second credit transaction, grounded on the first, and which would not
have taken place if the first had been transacted without the
intervention of a bill. Nor need the transactions end here. The bill may
be again discounted, or again paid away for goods, several times before
it is itself presented for payment. Nor would it be correct to say that
these successive holders, if they had not had the bill, might have
attained their purpose by purchasing goods on their own credit with the
dealers. They may not all of them be persons of credit, or they may
already have stretched their credit as far as it will go. And at all
events, either money or goods are more readily obtained on the credit of
two persons than of one. Nobody will pretend that it is as easy a thing
for a merchant to borrow a thousand pounds on his own credit, as to get
a bill discounted to the same amount, when the drawee is of known
solvencyb.

If we now suppose that A, instead of giving a bill, obtains a loan of
bank notes from a banker C, and with them pays B for his goods, we shall
find the difference to be still greater. B is now independent even of a
discounter: A’s bill would have been taken in payment only by those who
were acquainted with his reputation for solvency, but a banker is a
person who has credit with the public generally, and whose notes are
taken in payment by every one, at least in his own neighbourhood:
insomuch that, by a custom which has grown into law, payment in bank
notes is a complete acquittance to the payer, whereas if he has paid by
a bill, he still remains liable to the debt, if the person on whom the
bill is drawn fails to pay it when due. B therefore can expend the whole
of the bank notes without at all involving his own credit; and whatever
power he had before of obtaining goods on book credit, remains to him
unimpaired, in addition to the purchasing power he derives from the
possession of the notes. The same remark applies to every person in
succession, into whose hands the notes may come. It is only A, the first
holder, (who used his credit to obtain the notes as a loan from the
issuer,) who can possibly find the credit he possesses in other quarters
abated by it; and even in his case that result is not probable; for
though, in reason, and if all his circumstances were known, every draft
already made upon his credit ought to diminish by so much his power of
obtaining more, yet in practice the reverse more frequently happens, and
his having been trusted by one person is supposed to be cevidence thatc
he may safely be trusted by others also.

It appears, therefore, that bank notes are a more powerful instrument
Edition: current; Page: [546] for raising prices than bills, and bills
than book credits. It does not, indeed, follow that credit will be more
used because it can be. When the state of trade holds out no particular
temptation to make large purchases on credit, dealers will use only a
small portion of the credit power, and it will depend only on
convenience whether the portion which they use will be taken in one form
or in another. It is not until the circumstances of the markets, and the
state of the mercantile mind, render many persons desirous of stretching
their credit to an unusual extent, that the distinctive properties of
the different forms of credit display themselves. Credit already
stretched to the utmost in the form of book debts, would be susceptible
of dad great additional extension by means of bills, and of eae still
greater by means of bank notes. The first, because each dealer, in
addition to his own credit, would be enabled to create a further
purchasing power out of the credit which he had himself given to others:
the second, because the banker’s credit with the public at large, coined
into notes, as bullion is coined into pieces of money to make it
portable and divisible, is so much purchasing power superadded, in the
hands of every successive holder, to that which he may derive from his
own credit. To state the matter otherwise; one single exertion of the
credit-power in the form of book credit, is only the foundation of a
single purchase: but if a bill is drawn, that same portion of credit may
serve for as many purchases as the number of times the bill changes
hands: while every bank note issued, renders the credit of the banker a
purchasing power to that amount in the hands of all the successive
holders, without impairing any power they may possess of effecting
purchases on their own credit. Credit, in short, has exactly the same
purchasing power with money; and as money tells upon prices not simply
in proportion to its amount, but to its amount multiplied by the number
of times it changes hands, so also does credit; and credit transferable
from hand to hand is in that proportion more potent, than credit which
only performs one purchase.

§ 5. [The distinction between bills, book credits, and bank notes is of
little practical importance] All this purchasing power, however, is
operative upon prices, only according to the proportion of it which is
used; and the effect, therefore, is only felt in a state of
circumstances calculated to lead to an unusually extended use of credit.
In such a state of circumstances, that is, in speculative times, it
cannot, I think, be denied, that prices are likely to rise higher if the
speculative purchases are made with bank notes, than when they are made
with bills, and when made by bills than when made by book credits. This,
however, is of far less practical importance than might at first be
imagined; because, in point of fact, speculative Edition: current; Page:
[547] purchases are not, in the great majority of cases, made either
with bank notes or with bills, but are made almost exclusively on book
credits. “Applications to the Bank for extended discount,” says the
highest authority on such subjects,* (and the same thing must be true of
applications to other banks) “occur rarely if ever in the origin or
progress of extensive speculations in commodities. These are entered
into, for the most part if not entirely, in the first instance, on
credit, for the length of term usual in the several trades; thus
entailing on the parties no immediate necessity for borrowing so much as
may be wanted for the purpose beyond their own available capital. This
applies particularly to speculative purchases of commodities on the
spot, with a view to resale. But these generally form the smaller
proportion of engagements on credit. By far the largest of those entered
into on the prospect of a rise of prices, are such as have in view
importations from abroad. The same remark, too, is applicable to the
export of commodities, when a large proportion is on the credit of the
shippers or their consignees. As long as circumstances hold out the
prospect of a favourable result, the credit of the parties is generally
sustained. If some of them wish to realize, there are others with
capital and credit ready to replace them; and if the events fully
justify the grounds on which the speculative transactions were entered
into (thus admitting of sales for consumption in time to replace the
capital embarked) there is no unusual demand for borrowed capital to
sustain them. It is only when by the vicissitudes of political events,
or of the seasons, or other adventitious circumstances, the forthcoming
supplies are found to exceed the computed rate of consumption, and a
fall of prices ensues, that an increased demand for capital takes place;
the market rate of interest then rises, and increased applications are
made to the Bank of England for discount.” So that the multiplication of
bank notes and other transferable paper does not, for the most part,
accompany and facilitate the speculation; but comes into play chiefly
when the tide is turning, and difficulties begin to be felt.

Of the extraordinary height to which speculative transactions can be
carried upon mere book credits, without the smallest addition to what is
commonly called the currency, very few persons are at all aware. “The
power of purchase,” says Mr. Tooke,† “by persons having capital and
credit, is much beyond anything that those who are unacquainted
practically with speculative markets have any idea of. . . . A person
having the reputation of capital enough for his regular business, and
enjoying good credit in his trade, if he takes a sanguine view of the
prospect of a rise of price Edition: current; Page: [548] of the article
in which he deals, and is favoured by circumstances in the outset and
progress of his speculation, may effect purchases to an extent perfectly
enormous, compared with his capital.” Mr. Tooke confirms this statement
by some remarkable instances, exemplifying the immense purchasing power
which may be exercised, and rise of price which may be produced, by
credit not represented by either bank notes or bills of exchange.

“Amongst the aearliera speculators for an advance in the price of tea,
in consequence of our dispute with China in 1839, were several retail
grocers and tea-dealers. There was a general disposition among the trade
to get into stock: that is, to lay in at once a quantity which would
meet the probable demand from their customers for several months to
come. Some, however, among them, more sanguine and adventurous than the
rest, availed themselves of their credit with the importers and
wholesale dealers, for purchasing quantities much beyond the estimated
demand in their own business. As the purchases were made in the first
instance ostensibly, and perhaps really, for the legitimate purposes and
within the limits of their regular business, the parties were enabled to
buy without the condition of any deposit; whereas speculators, known to
be such, are required to pay 2l. per chest, to cover any probable
difference of price which might arise before the expiration of the
prompt, which, for this article, is three months. Without, therefore,
the outlay of a single farthing of actual capital or currency in any
shape, they made purchases to a considerable extent; and with the profit
realized on the resale of a part of these purchases, they were enabled
to pay the deposit on further quantities when required, as was the case
when the extent of the purchases attracted attention. In this way, the
speculation went on at advancing prices (100 per cent and upwards) till
nearly the expiration of the prompt, and if at that time circumstances
had been such as to justify the apprehension which at one time
prevailed, that all future supplies would be cut off, the prices might
have still further advanced, and at any rate not have retrograded. In
this case, the speculators might have realized, if not all the profit
they had anticipated, a very handsome sum, upon which they might have
been enabled to extend their business greatly, or to retire from it
altogether, with a reputation for great sagacity in thus making their
fortune. But instead of this favourable result, it so happened that two
or three cargoes of tea which had been transhipped were admitted,
contrary to expectation, to entry on their arrival here, and it was
found that further indirect shipments were in progress. Thus the supply
was increased beyond the calculation of the speculators: and at the same
time, the consumption had been diminished by the high price. There was,
consequently, a violent reaction on the market; the speculators were
Edition: current; Page: [549] unable to sell without such a sacrifice as
disabled them from fulfilling their engagements, and several of them
consequently failed. Among these, one was mentioned, who having a
capital not exceeding 1200l. which was locked up in his business, had
contrived to buy 4000 chests, value above 80,000l., the loss upon which
was about 16,000l.

“The other example which I have to give, is that of the operation on the
corn market between 1838 and 1842. There was an instance of a person
who, when he entered on his extensive speculations, was, as it appeared
by the subsequent examination of his affairs, possessed of a capital not
exceeding 5000l., but being successful in the outset, and favoured by
circumstances in the progress of his operations, he contrived to make
purchases to such an extent, that when he stopped payment his
engagements were found to amount to between 500,000l. and 600,000l.
Other instances might be cited of parties without any capital at all,
who, by dint of mere credit, were enabled, while the aspect of the
market favoured their views, to make purchases to a very great extent.

“And be it observed, that these speculations, involving enormous
purchases on little or no capital, were carried on in 1839 and 1840,
when the money market was in its most contracted state; or when,
according to modern phraseology, there was the greatest scarcity of
money.”

But though the great instrument of speculative purchases is book
credits, it cannot be contested that in speculative periods an increase
does take place in the quantity both of bills of exchange and of bank
notes. This increase, indeed, so far as bank notes are concerned, hardly
ever takes place in the earliest stage of the speculations: advances
from bankers (as Mr. Tooke observes) not being applied for in order to
purchase, but in order to hold on without selling when the usual term of
credit has expired, and the high price which was calculated on has not
arrived. But the tea speculators mentioned by Mr. Tooke could not have
carried their speculations beyond the three months which are the usual
term of credit in their trade, unless they had been able to obtain
advances from bankers, which, if the expectation of a rise of price had
still continued, they probably could have done.

Since, then, credit in the form of bank notes is a more potent
instrument for raising prices than book credits, an unrestrained power
of resorting to this instrument may contribute to prolong and heighten
the speculative rise of prices, and hence to aggravate the subsequent
recoil. But in what degree? and what importance ought we to ascribe to
this possibility? It may help us to form some judgment on this point, if
we consider the proportion which the utmost increase of bank notes in a
period of speculation, bears, I do not say to the whole mass of credit
in the country, but to the bills of exchange alone. The average amount
of bills in existence at any one time Edition: current; Page: [550] is
supposed bgreatlyb to exceed a hundred millions sterling.* The bank note
circulation of Great Britain and Ireland cseldom exceeds fortyc
millions, and the increase in speculative periods at most two or three.
And even this, as we have seen, hardly ever comes into play until that
advanced period of the speculation at which the tide shows signs of
turning, and the dealers generally are rather thinking of the means of
fulfilling their existing engagements, than meditating an extension of
them: while the quantity of bills in existence is largely increased from
the very commencement of the speculations.

§ 6. [Cheques are an instrument for acting on prices, equally powerful
with bank notes] It is well known that of late years, an artificial
limitation of the issue of bank notes has been regarded by many
political economists, and by a great portion of the public, as an
expedient of supreme efficacy for preventing, and when it cannot
prevent, for moderating, the fever of speculation; and this opinion
received the recognition and sanction of the legislature by the Currency
Act of 1844. At the point, however, which our Edition: current; Page:
[551] inquiries have reached, though we have conceded to bank notes a
greater power over prices than is possessed by bills or book credits, we
have not found reason to think that this superior efficacy has much
share in producing the rise of prices which accompanies a period of
speculation, nor consequently that any restraint applied to this one
instrument can be efficacious to the degree which is often supposed, in
moderating either that rise, or the recoil which follows it. We shall be
still less inclined to think so, when we consider that there is a fourth
form of credit transactions, by cheques on bankers, and transfers in a
banker’s books, which is exactly parallel in every respect to bank
notes, giving equal facilities to an extension of credit, and capable of
acting on prices quite as powerfully. In the words of Mr. Fullarton,*
“there is not a single object at present attained through the agency of
Bank of England notes, which might not be as effectually accomplished by
each individual keeping an account with the bank, and transacting all
his payments of five pounds and upwards by cheque.” A bank, instead of
lending its notes to a merchant or dealer, might open an account with
him, and credit the account with the sum it had agreed to advance: on an
understanding that he should not draw out that sum in any other mode
than by drawing cheques against it in favour of those to whom he had
occasion to make payments. These cheques might possibly even pass from
hand to hand like bank notes; more commonly however the receiver would
pay them into the hands of his own banker, and when he wanted the money,
would draw a fresh cheque against it: and hence an objector may aurgea
that as the original cheque would very soon be presented for payment,
when it must be paid either in notes or in coin, notes or coin to an
equal amount must be provided as the ultimate means of liquidation. It
is not so, however. The person to whom the cheque is transferred, may
perhaps deal with the same banker, and the cheque may return to the very
bank on which it was drawn: this is very often the case in country
districts; if so, no payment will be called for, but a simple transfer
in the banker’s books will settle the transaction. If the cheque is paid
into a different bank, it will not be presented for payment, but
liquidated by set-off against other cheques; and in a state of
circumstances favourable to a general extension of banking credits, a
banker who has granted more credit, and has therefore more cheques drawn
on him, will also have more cheques on other bankers paid to him, and
will only have to provide notes or cash for the payment of balances; for
which purpose the ordinary reserve of prudent bankers, one-third of
their liabilities, will abundantly suffice. Now, if he had granted the
extension of credit by means of an issue of his own notes, he must
equally have retained, in coin bor Bank of England notes,b the usual
Edition: current; Page: [552] reserve: so that he can, as Mr. Fullarton
says, give every facility of credit by what may be termed a cheque
circulation, which he could give by a note circulation.

This extension of credit by entries in a banker’s books, has all that
superior efficiency in acting on prices, which we ascribed to an
extension by means of bank notes. As a bank note of 20l., paid to any
one, gives him 20l. of purchasing-power based on credit, over and above
whatever credit he had of his own, so does a cheque paid to him do the
same: for, although he may make no purchase with the cheque itself, he
deposits it with his banker, and can draw against it. As this act of
drawing a cheque against another which has been exchanged and cancelled,
can be repeated as often as a purchase with a bank note, it effects the
same increase of purchasing power. The original loan, or credit, given
by the banker to his customer, is potentially multiplied as a means of
purchase, in the hands of the successive persons to whom portions of the
credit are paid away, just as the purchasing power of a bank note is
multiplied by the number of persons through whose hands it passes before
it is returned to the issuer.

These considerations abate very much from the importance of any effect
which can be produced in allaying the vicissitudes of commerce, by so
superficial a contrivance as the one so much relied on of late, the
restriction of the issue of bank notes by an artificial rule. An
examination of all the consequences of that restriction, and canc
estimate of the reasons for and against it, must be deferred until we
have treated of the foreign exchanges, and the international movements
of bullion. At present we are only concerned with the general theory of
prices, of which the different influence of different kinds of credit is
an essential part.

a§ 7. [Are bank notes money?] There has been a great amount of
discussion and argument on the question whether several of these forms
of credit, and in particular whether bank notes, ought to be considered
as money. The question is so purely verbal as to be bscarcely worth
raisingb, and one would have some difficulty in comprehending why so
much importance is attached to it, if there were not some cauthoritiesc
who, still adhering to the doctrine of the infancy of society and of
political economy, that the quantity of money compared with that of
commodities, determines general prices, think it important to prove that
bank notes and no other forms of credit are money, in order to support
the inference that bank notes and no other forms of credit influence
prices. It is obvious, however, that prices do not depend on money, but
on purchases. Money left with a banker, and not drawn against, or drawn
against for other purposes than buying commodities, has no effect on
prices, any more than credit which Edition: current; Page: [553] is not
used. Credit which disd used to purchase commodities, affects prices in
the same manner as money. Money and credit are thus exactly on a par, in
their effect on prices; and whether we choose to class bank notes with
the one or the other, is in this respect entirely immaterial.

Since, however, this question of nomenclature has been raised, it seems
desirable that it should be answered. The reason given for considering
bank notes as money, is, that by law and usage they have the property,
in common with metallic money, of finally closing the transactions in
which they are employed; while no other mode of paying one debt by
transferring another, has that privilege. The first remark which here
suggests itself is, that on this showing, the notes at least of private
banks are not money; for a creditor cannot be forced to accept them in
payment of a debt. They certainly close the transaction if he does
accept them; but so, on the same supposition, would a bale of cloth, or
a pipe of wine; which are not for that reason regarded as money. It
seems to be an essential part of the idea of money, that it be legal
tender. An inconvertible paper which is legal tender is universally
admitted to be money; in the French language the phrase papier-monnaie
actually means inconvertibility, convertible notes being merely billets
à porteur. It is only in the case of Bank of England notes under the law
of convertibility, that any difficulty arises; those notes not being a
legal tender from the Bank itself, though a legal tender from all other
persons. Bank of England notes undoubtedly do close transactions, so far
as respects the buyer. When he has once paid in Bank of England notes,
he can in no case be required to pay over again. But I confess I cannot
see how the transaction can be deemed complete as regards the seller,
when he will only be found to have received the price of his commodity
provided the Bank keeps its promise to pay. An instrument which would be
deprived of all value by the insolvency of a corporation, cannot be
money in any sense in which money is opposed to credit. It either is not
money, or it is money and credit too. It may be most suitably described
as coined credit. The other forms of credit may be distinguished from it
as credit in ingots.a

a§ 8.a [There is no generic distinction between bank notes and other
forms of credit] Some high authorities have claimed for bank notes, as
compared with other modes of credit, a greater distinction in respect to
influence on price, than we have seen reason to allow; a difference, not
in degree, but in kind. They ground this distinction on the fact, that
ball bills and cheques, as well as all book-debts, are from the first
intended to be, Edition: current; Page: [554] and actually are,
ultimately liquidated either in coin or in notes. The bank notes in
circulation, jointly with the coin, are therefore, according to these
authorities, the basis on which all the other expedients of credit rest;
and in proportion to the basis will be the superstructure; insomuch that
the quantity of bank notes determines that of all the other forms of
credit. If bank notes are multiplied, there will, they seem to think, be
more bills, more payments by cheque, and I presume, more book credits;
and by regulating and limiting the issue of bank notes, they think that
all other forms of credit are, by an indirect consequence, brought under
a similar limitation. I believe I have stated the opinion of these
authorities correctly, though I have nowhere seen the grounds of it set
forth with such distinctness as to make me feel quite certain that I
understand them. cIt may be true, that according as there are more or
fewer bank notes, there is also in general (though not invariably), more
or less of other descriptions of credit; for the same state of affairs
which leads to an increase of credit in one shape, leads to an increase
of it in other shapes. But I see no reason for believing that the one is
the cause of the other.c If indeed we begin by assuming, as I suspect is
tacitly done, that prices are regulated by coin and bank notes, the
proposition maintained will certainly follow; for, according as prices
are higher or lower, the same purchases will give rise to bills,
cheques, and book credits of a larger or dad smaller amount. But the
premise in this reasoning is the very proposition to be proved. Setting
this assumption aside, I know not how the conclusion can be
substantiated. The credit given to any one by those with whom he deals,
does not depend on the quantity of bank notes or coin in circulation at
the time, but on their opinion of his solvency: if any consideration of
a more general character enters into their calculation, it is only in a
time of pressure on the loan market, when they are not certain of being
themselves able to obtain the credit on which they have been accustomed
to rely; and even then, what they look to is the general state of the
loan market, and not (preconceived theory apart) the amount of bank
notes. So far, as to the willingness to give credit. And the willingness
of ea dealere to use his credit, depends on his expectations of gain,
that is, on his opinion of the probable future price of his commodity;
an opinion grounded either on the rise or fall already going on, or on
his prospective judgment respecting the supply and the rate of
consumption. When a dealer extends his purchases beyond his immediate
means of payment, engaging to pay at a specified time, he does so in the
expectation either that the transaction will have terminated favourably
before that time arrives, or that he shall then be in possession of
sufficient funds from the Edition: current; Page: [555] proceeds of his
other transactions. The fufilment of these expectations depends upon
prices, but not fespeciallyf upon the amount of bank notes. He may,
doubtless, also ask himself, in case he should be disappointed in these
expectations, to what quarter he can look for a temporary advance, to
enable him, at the worst, to keep his engagements. But in the first
place, this prospective reflection on the somewhat more or less of
difficulty which he may have in tiding over his embarrassments, seems
too slender an inducement to be much of a restraint in a period supposed
to be one of rash adventure, and upon persons so confident of success as
to involve themselves beyond their certain means of extrication. And
further, I apprehend that their confidence of being helped out in the
event of ill-fortune, will mainly depend on their opinion of their own
individual credit, with, perhaps, some consideration, not of the
quantity of the currency, but of the general state of the loan market.
They are aware that, in case of a commercial crisis, they shall have
difficulty in obtaining advances. But if they thought it likely that a
commercial crisis would occur before they had realized, they would not
speculate. If no great contraction of general credit occurs, they will
feel no doubt of obtaining any advances which they absolutely require,
provided the state of their own affairs at the time affords in the
estimation of lenders a sufficient prospect that those advances will be
repaid.

Edition: current; Page: [556]


CHAPTER XIII: Of an Inconvertible Paper Currency

§ 1. [The value of an inconvertible paper, depending on its quantity, is
a matter of arbitrary regulation] After experience had shown that pieces
of paper, of no intrinsic value, by merely bearing upon them the written
profession of being equivalent to a certain number of francs, dollars,
or pounds, could be made to circulate as such, and to produce all the
benefit to the issuers which could have been produced by the coins which
they purported to represent; governments began to think that it would be
a happy device if they could appropriate to themselves this benefit,
free from the condition to which individuals issuing such paper
substitutes for money were subject, of giving, when required, for the
sign, the thing signified. They determined to try whether they could not
emancipate themselves from this unpleasant obligation, and make a piece
of paper issued by them pass for a pound, by merely calling it a pound,
and consenting to receive it in payment of the taxes. And such is the
influence of almost all established governments, that they have
generally succeeded in attaining this object: I believe I might say they
have always succeeded for a time, and the power has only been lost to
them after they had compromised it by the most flagrant abuse.

In the case supposed, the functions of money are performed by a thing
which derives its power afora performing them solely from convention;
but convention is quite sufficient to confer the power; since nothing
more is needful to make a person accept anything as money, and even at
any arbitrary value, than the persuasion that it will be taken from him
on the same terms by others. The only question is, what determines the
value of such a bcurrency;b since it cannot be, as in the case of gold
and silver (or paper exchangeable for them at pleasure), the cost of
production.

We have seen, however, that even in the case of a metallic currency, the
immediate agency in determining its value is its quantity. If the
quantity, instead of depending on the ordinary mercantile motives of
profit and loss, could be arbitrarily fixed by authority, the value
would depend on the fiat of that authority, not on cost of production.
The quantity of a paper Edition: current; Page: [557] currency not
convertible into the metals at the option of the holder, ccanc be
arbitrarily fixed; especially if the issuer is the sovereign power of
the state. The value, therefore, of such a currency, is entirely
arbitrary.

Suppose that, in a country of which the currency is wholly metallic, a
paper currency is suddenly issued, to the amount of half the metallic
circulation; not by a banking establishment, or in the form of loans,
but by the government, in payment of salaries and purchase of
commodities. The currency being suddenly increased by one-half, all
prices will rise, and among the rest, the prices of all things made of
gold and silver. An ounce of manufactured gold will become more valuable
than an ounce of gold coin, by more than that customary difference which
compensates for the value of the workmanship; and it will be profitable
to melt the coin for the purpose of being manufactured, until as much
has been taken from the currency by the subtraction of gold, as had been
added to it by the issue of paper. Then prices will relapse to what they
were at first, and there will be nothing changed except that a paper
currency has been substituted for half of the metallic currency which
existed before. Suppose, now, a second emission of paper; the same
series of effects will be renewed; and so on, until the whole of the
metallic money has disappeared: that is, if paper be issued of as low a
denomination as the lowest coin; if not, as much will remain, as
convenience requires for the smaller payments. The addition made to the
quantity of gold and silver disposable for ornamental purposes, will
somewhat reduce, for a time, the value of the article; and as long as
this is the case, even though paper has been issued to the original
amount of the metallic circulation, as much coin will remain in
circulation along with it, as will keep the value of the currency down
to the reduced value of the metallic material; but the value having
fallen below the cost of production, a stoppage or diminution of the
supply from the mines will enable the surplus to be carried off by the
ordinary agents of destruction, after which, the metals and the currency
will recover their natural value. We are here supposing, as we have
supposed throughout, that the country has mines of its own, and no
commercial intercourse with other countries; for, in a country having
foreign trade, the coin which is rendered superfluous by an issue of
paper is carried off by a much prompter method.

Up to this point, the effects of a paper currency are substantially the
same, whether it is convertible into specie or not. It is when the
metals have been completely superseded and driven from circulation, that
the difference between convertible and inconvertible paper begins to be
operative. When the gold or silver has all gone from circulation, and an
equal quantity of paper has taken its place, suppose that a still
further issue is superadded. The same series of phenomena recommences:
prices rise, among the rest Edition: current; Page: [558] the prices of
gold and silver articles, and it becomes an object as before to procure
coin in order to convert it into bullion. There is no longer any coin in
circulation; but if the paper currency is convertible, coin may still be
obtained from the issuers, in exchange for notes. All additional notes,
therefore, which are attempted to be forced into circulation after the
metals have been completely superseded, will return upon the issuers in
exchange for coin; and they will not be able to maintain in circulation
such a quantity of convertible paper, as to sink its value below the
metal which it represents. It is not so, however, with an inconvertible
currency. To the increase of that (if permitted by law) there is no
check. The issuers may add to it indefinitely, lowering its value and
raising prices in proportion; they may, in other words, depreciate the
currency without limit.

Such a power, in whomsoever vested, is an intolerable evil. All
variations in the value of the circulating medium are mischievous: they
disturb existing contracts and expectations, and the liability to such
changes renders every pecuniary engagement of long date entirely
precarious. The person who buys for himself, or dgivesd to another, an
annuity of 100l., does not know whether it will be equivalent to 200l.
or to 50l. a few years hence. Great as this evil would be if it depended
only on accident, it is still greater when placed at the arbitrary
disposal of ean individuale or a body of findividualsf; who may have any
kind or degree of interest to be served by an artificial fluctuation in
fortunes; and who have at any rate a strong interest in issuing as much
as possible, each issue being in itself a source of profit. Not to add,
that the issuers may have, and in the case of a government paper, always
have, a direct interest in lowering the value of the currency, because
it is the medium in which their own debts are computed.

§ 2. [If regulated by the price of bullion, an inconvertible currency
might be safe, but not expedient] In order that the value of the
currency may be secure from being altered by design, and may be as
little as possible liable to fluctuation from accident, the articles
least liable of all known commodities to vary in their value, the
precious metals, have been made in all civilized countries the standard
of value for the circulating medium; and no paper currency ought to
exist of which the value cannot be made to conform to theirs. Nor has
this fundamental maxim ever been entirely lost sight of, even by the
governments which have most abused the power of creating inconvertible
paper. If they have not (as they generally have) professed an intention
of paying in specie at some indefinite future time, they have at least,
by giving to their paper issues the names of their coins, made a
virtual, though generally a false, profession of intending to keep them
at a value corresponding to that of the coins. This is not
impracticable, Edition: current; Page: [559] even with an inconvertible
paper. There is not indeed the self-acting check which convertibility
brings with it. But there is a clear and unequivocal indication by which
to judge whether the currency is depreciated, and to what extent. That
indication is, the price of the precious metals. When holders of paper
cannot demand coin to be converted into bullion, and when there is none
left in circulation, bullion rises and falls in price like other things;
and if it is above the Mint price, if an ounce of gold, which would be
coined into the equivalent of 3l. 17s. 10½d., is sold for 4l. or 5l. in
paper, the value of the currency has sunk just that much below what the
value of a metallic currency would be. If, therefore, the issue of
inconvertible paper were subjected to strict rules, one rule being that
whenever bullion rose above the Mint price, the issues should be
contracted until the market price of bullion and the Mint price were
again in accordance, such a currency would not be subject to any of the
evils usually deemed inherent in an inconvertible paper.

But also such a system of currency would have no advantages sufficient
to recommend it to adoption. An inconvertible currency, regulated by the
price of bullion, would conform exactly, in all its variations, to a
convertible one; and the only advantage gained, would be that of
exemption from the necessity of keeping any reserve of the precious
metals; which is not a very important consideration, especially as a
government, so long as its good faith is not suspected, needs not keep
so large a reserve as private issuers, being not so liable to great and
sudden demands, since there never can be any real doubt of its solvency.
Against this small advantage is to be set, in the first place, the
possibility of fraudulent tampering with the price of bullion for the
sake of acting on the currency; in the manner of the fictitious sales of
corn, to influence the averages, so much and so justly complained of
while the corn laws were in force. But a still stronger consideration is
the importance of adhering to a simple principle, intelligible to the
most untaught capacity. Everybody can understand convertibility; every
one sees that what can be at any moment exchanged for five pounds, is
worth five pounds. Regulation by the price of bullion is a more complex
idea, and does not recommend itself through the same familiar
associations. There would be nothing like the same confidence, by the
public generally, in an inconvertible currency so regulated, as in a
convertible one: and the most instructed person might reasonably doubt
whether such a rule would be as likely to be inflexibly adhered to. The
grounds of the rule not being so well understood by the public, opinion
would probably not enforce it with as much rigidity, and, in any
circumstances of difficulty, would be likely to turn against it; while
to the government itself a suspension of convertibility would appear a
much stronger and more extreme measure, than a relaxation of what might
possibly be considered a somewhat artificial rule, Edition: current;
Page: [560] There is therefore a great preponderance of reasons in
favour of a convertible, in preference to even the best regulated
inconvertible currency. The temptation to over-issue, in certain
financial emergencies, is so strong, that nothing is admissible which
can tend, in however slight a degree, to weaken the barriers that
restrain it.

§ 3. [Examination of the doctrine that an inconvertible currency is safe
if representing actual property] Although no doctrine in political
economy rests on more obvious grounds than the mischief of a paper
currency not maintained at the same value with a metallic, either by
convertibility, or by some principal of limitation equivalent to it; and
although, accordingly, this doctrine has, though not till after the
discussions of many years, been tolerably effectually drummed into the
public mind; yet dissentients are still numerous, and projectors every
now and then start up, with plans for curing all the economical evils of
society by means of an unlimited issue of inconvertible paper. There is,
in truth, a great charm in the idea. To be able to pay off the national
debt, defray the expenses of government without taxation, and in fine,
to make the fortunes of the whole community, is a brilliant prospect,
when once a man is capable of believing that printing a few characters
on bits of paper will do it. The philosopher’s stone could not be
expected to do more.

As these projects, however often slain, always resuscitate, it is not
superfluous to examine one or two of the fallacies by which the schemers
impose upon themselves. One of the commonest is, that a paper currency
cannot be issued in excess so long as every note issued represents
property, or has a foundation of actual property to rest on. These
phrases, of representing and resting, seldom convey any distinct or
well-defined idea: when they do, their meaning is no more than this—that
the issuers of the paper must have property, either of their own, or
entrusted to them, to the value of all the notes they issue: though for
what purpose does not very clearly appear; for if the property cannot be
claimed in exchange for the notes, it is difficult to divine in what
manner its mere existence can serve to uphold their value. I presume,
however, it is intended as a guarantee that the holders would be finally
reimbursed, in case any untoward event should cause the whole concern to
be wound up. On this theory there have been many schemes for “coining
the whole land of the country into money” and the like.

In so far as this notion has any connexion at all with reason, it seems
to originate in confounding two entirely distinct evils, to which a
paper currency is liable. One is, the insolvency of the issuers; which,
if the paper is grounded on their credit—if it makes any promise of
payment in cash, either on demand or at any future time—of course
deprives the paper Edition: current; Page: [561] of any value which it
derives from athea promise. To this evil paper credit is equally liable,
however moderately used; and against it, a proviso that all issues
should be “founded on property,” as for instance that notes should only
be issued on the security of some valuable thing expressly pledged for
their redemption, would really be efficacious as a precaution. But the
theory takes no account of another evil, which is incident to the notes
of the most solvent firm, company, or government; that of being
depreciated in value from being issued in excessive quantity. The
assignats, during the French Revolution were ban exampleb of a currency
grounded on these principles. The assignats “represented” an immense
amount of highly valuable property, namely the lands of the crown, the
church, the monasteries, and the emigrants; amounting cpossiblyc to half
the territory of France. They were, in fact, orders or assignments on
this mass of land. The revolutionary government had the idea of
“coining” these lands into money; but, to do them justice, they did not
originally contemplate the immense multiplication of issues to which
they were eventually driven by the failure of all other financial
resources. They imagined that the assignats would come rapidly back to
the issuers in exchange for land, and that they should be able to
reissue them continually until the lands were all disposed of, without
having at any time more than a very moderate quantity in circulation.
Their hope was frustrated: the land did not sell so quickly as they
expected; buyers were not inclined to invest their money in possessions
which were likely to be resumed without compensation if the Revolution
succumbed: the bits of paper which represented land, becoming
prodigiously multiplied, could no more keep up their value than the land
itself would have done if it had all been brought to market at once; and
the result was that it at last required an assignat of dsixd hundred
francs to pay for a epound of buttere.

The example of the assignats has been said not to be conclusive, because
an assignat only represented land in general, but not a definite
quantity of land. To have prevented their depreciation, the proper
course, it is affirmed, would have been to have made a valuation of all
the confiscated property at its metallic value, and to have issued
assignats up to, but not beyond, that limit; giving to the holders a
right to demand any piece of land, at its registered valuation, in
exchange for assignats to the same amount. There can be no question
about the superiority of this plan over the one actually adopted. Had
this course been followed, the assignats could never have been
depreciated to the inordinate degree they were; for—as they would have
retained all their purchasing power in relation to land, however much
Edition: current; Page: [562] they might have fallen in respect to other
things—before they had lost very much of their market value, they would
probably have been brought in to be exchanged for land. It must be
remembered, however, that their not being depreciated would presuppose
that no greater number of them continued in circulation than would have
circulated if they had been convertible into cash. However convenient,
therefore, in a time of revolution, this currency convertible into land
on demand might have been, as a contrivance for selling rapidly a great
quantity of land with the least possible sacrifice; it is difficult to
see what advantage it would have, as the permanent system of a country,
over a currency convertible into coin: while it is not at all difficult
to see what would be its disadvantages; since land is far more variable
in value than gold and silver; and besides, land, to most persons, being
rather an encumbrance than a desirable possession, except to be
converted into money, people would submit to a much greater depreciation
before demanding land, than they will before demanding gold or silver.*

a§ 4.a [bExamination of the doctrine that an increase of the currency
promotes industryb] cAnother of the fallacies from which the advocates
Edition: current; Page: [563] of an inconvertible currency derive
support, is the notion that an increase of the currency quickens
industry. This idea was set afloat by Hume, in his Essay on Money, and
has had many devoted adherents since; witness the Birmingham currency
schoold, of whom Mr. Attwood was eat onee time the most conspicuous
representative. Mr. Attwood maintained that a rise of prices produced by
an increase of paper currency, stimulates every producer to his utmost
fexertionsf, and brings all the capital and labour of the country into
complete employment; and that this has invariably happened in all
periods of rising prices, when the rise was on a sufficiently great
scale. I presume, however, that the inducement which, according to Mr.
Attwood, excited this unusual ardour in all persons engaged in
production, must have been the expectation of getting more gcommodities
generally, more real wealth, in exchange for the produce of their
labour, and not merely more pieces of paper. This expectation, however,
must have been, by the very terms of the supposition, disappointed,
since, all prices being supposed to rise equally, no one was really
better paid for his goods than before. Those who agree with Mr. Attwood
could only succeed Edition: current; Page: [564] in winning people on to
these unwonted exertions, by a prolongation of what would in fact be a
delusion; contriving matters so, that by a progressive rise of money
prices, every producer shall always seem to be in the very act of
obtaining an increased remuneration which he never, in reality, does
obtain. It is unnecessary to advert to any other of the objections to
this plan, than that of its total impracticability. It calculates on
finding the whole world persisting for ever in the belief that more
pieces of paper are more riches, and never discovering that, with all
their paper, they cannot buy more of anything that they could before. No
such mistake was made during any of the periods of high prices, on the
experience of which this school lays so much stress. At the periods
which Mr. Attwood mistook for times of prosperity, and which were simply
(as all periods of high prices, under a convertible currency, must be)
times of speculation, the speculators did not think they were growing
rich because the high prices would last, but because they would not
last, and because whoever contrived to realize while they did last,
would find himself, after the recoil, in possession of a greater number
of pounds sterling, without their having become of less value. If, at
the close of the speculation, an issue of paper had been made,
sufficient to keep prices up to the point which they attained when at
the highest, no one would have been more disappointed than the
speculators; since the gain which they thought to have reaped by
realizing in time (at the expense of their competitors, who bought when
they sold, and had to sell after the revulsion) would have faded away in
their hands, and instead of it they would have got nothing except a few
more paper tickets to count by.

Hume’s version of the doctrine differed in a slight degree from Mr.
Attwood’s. He thought that all commodities would not rise in price
simultaneously, and that some persons therefore would obtain a real
gain, by getting more money for what they had to sell, while the things
which they wished to buy might not yet have risen. And those who would
reap this gain would always be (he seems to think) the first comers. It
seems obvious, however, that for every person who thus gains more than
usual, there is necessarily some other person who gains less. The loser,
if things took place as Hume supposes, would be the seller of the
commodities which are slowest to rise; who, by the supposition, parts
with his goods at the old prices, to purchasers who have already
benefited by the new. This seller has obtained for his commodity only
the accustomed quantity of money, while there are already some things of
which that money will no longer purchase as much as before. If,
therefore, he knows what is going on, he will raise his price, and then
the buyer will not have the gain, which is supposed to stimulate his
industry. But if, on the contrary, the seller does not know the state of
the case, and only discovers it when he finds, in Edition: current;
Page: [565] laying his money out, that it does not go so far, he then
obtains less than the ordinary remuneration for his labour and capital;
and if the other dealer’s industry is encouraged, it should seem that
his must, from the opposite cause, be impaired.

a§ 5.a [Depreciation of currency is a tax on the community, and a fraud
on creditors] There is no way in which a general and permanent rise of
prices, or in other words, depreciation of money, can benefit anybody,
except at the expense of somebody else. The substitution of paper for
bmetallic currency is a national gain: any further increase of paper
beyond this is but a form of robbery.

An issue of notes is a manifest gain to the issuers, who, until the
notes are returned for payment, obtain the use of them as if they were a
real capital: and so long as the notes are no permanent addition to the
currency, but merely supersede gold or silver to the same amount, the
gain of the issuer is a loss to no one; it is obtained by saving to the
community the expense of the more costly material. But if there is no
gold or silver to be superseded—if the notes are added to the currency,
instead of being substituted for the metallic part of it—all holders of
currency lose, by the depreciation of its value, the exact equivalent of
what the issuer gains. A tax is virtually levied on them for his
benefit. It will be objected by some, that gains are also made by the
producers and dealers who, by means of the increased issue, are
accommodated with loans. Theirs, however, is not an additional gain, but
a portion of that which is reaped by the issuer at the expense of all
possessors of money. The profits arising from the contribution levied
upon the public, he does not keep to himself, but divides with his
customers.

But besides the benefit reaped by the issuers, or by others through
them, at the expense of the public generally, there is another unjust
gain obtained by a larger class, namely by those who are under fixed
pecuniary obligations. All such persons are freed, by a depreciation of
the currency, from a portion of the burthen of their debts or other
engagements: in other words, part of the property of their creditors is
gratuitously transferred to them. On a superficial view it may be
imagined that this is an advantage to industry; since the productive
classes are great borrowers, and generally owe larger debts to the
unproductive (if we include among the latter all persons not actually in
business) than the unproductive classes owe to them; especially if the
national debt be included. It is only thus that a general rise of prices
can be a source of benefit to producers and dealers; by diminishing the
pressure of their fixed burthens. And this might be accounted an
advantage, if integrity and good faith were of no importance Edition:
current; Page: [566] to the world, and to industry and commerce in
particular. Not many, however, have been found to say that the currency
ought to be depreciated on the simple ground of its being desirable to
rob the national creditor and private creditors of a part of what is in
their bond. The schemes which have tended that way have almost always
had some appearance of special and circumstantial justification, such as
the necessity of compensating for a prior injustice committed in the
contrary direction.

a§ 6.a [Examination of some pleas for committing this fraud] Thus in
England, bfor many years subsequent to 1819, it wasb pertinaciously
contended, that a large portion of the national debt, and a multitude of
private debts still in existence, were contracted between 1797 and 1819,
when the Bank of England was exempted from giving cash for its notes;
and that it is grossly unjust to borrowers, (that is, in the case of the
national debt, to all tax-payers) that they should cbe paying interest
on the same nominal sums in a currency of full value, which were
borrowed in a depreciated one. The depreciation, according to the views
and objects of the particular writer, dwasd represented to have averaged
thirty, fifty, or even more than fifty per cent: and the conclusion
ewase, that either we ought to return to this depreciated currency, or
to strike off from fthe national debt, and from mortgages or other
private debts of old standingf, a percentage corresponding to the
estimated amount of the depreciation.

To this doctrine, the following gwasg the answer usually made. Granting
that, by returning to cash payments without lowering the standard, an
injustice was done to debtors, in holding them liable for the same
amount of a currency enhanced in value, which they had borrowed while it
was depreciated; it is now too late to make reparation for this injury.
The debtors and creditors of to-day are not the debtors and creditors of
1819: the lapse of years has entirely altered the pecuniary relations of
the community; and it being impossible now to ascertain the particular
persons who were either benefited or injured, to attempt to retrace our
steps would hnot beh redressing a wrong, but superadding a second act of
wide-spread injustice to the one already committed. This argument is
certainly conclusive on the practical question; but it places the honest
conclusion on too narrow and too low a ground. It concedes that the
measure of 1819, called Edition: current; Page: [567] Peel’s Bill, by
which cash payments were resumed at the original standard of 3l. 17s.
10½d., was really the injustice it iwasi said to be. This is an
admission wholly opposed to the truth. Parliament had no alternative; it
was absolutely bound to adhere to the acknowledged standard; as may be
shown on three distinct grounds, two of fact, and one of principle.

The reasons of fact are these. In the first place it is not true that
the debts, private or public, incurred during the Bank restriction, were
contracted in a currency of lower value than that in which the interest
is now paid. It is indeed true that the suspension of the obligation to
pay in specie, did put it in the power of the Bank to depreciate the
currency. It is true also that the Bank really exercised that power,
though to a far less extent than is often pretended; since the
difference between the market price of gold and the Mint valuation,
during the greater part of the interval, was very trifling, and when it
was greatest, during the last five years of the war, did not much exceed
thirty per cent. To the extent of that difference, the currency was
depreciated, that is, its value was below that of the standard to which
it professed to adhere. But the state of Europe at that time was
such—there was so unusual an absorption of the precious metals, by
hoarding, and jinj the military chests of the vast armies which then
desolated the Continent, that the value of the standard itself was very
considerably raised: and the best authorities, among whom it is
sufficient to name Mr. Tooke, have, after an elaborate investigation,
satisfied themselves that the difference between paper and bullion was
not greater than the enhancement in value of gold itself, and that the
paper, though depreciated relatively to the then value of gold, did not
sink below the ordinary value, at other times, either of gold or of a
convertible paper. If this be true (and the evidences of the fact are
conclusively stated in Mr. Tooke’s History of Prices) the foundation of
the whole case against the fundholder and other creditors on the ground
of depreciation is subverted.

But, secondly, even if the currency had really been lowered in value at
each period of the Bank restriction, in the same degree in which it was
depreciated in relation to its standard, we must remember that a part
only of the national debt, or of other permanent engagements, kwask
incurred during the Bank restriction. A large part had been contracted
before 1797; a still larger during the early years of the restriction,
when the difference between paper and gold was yet small. To the holders
of the former part, an injury was done, by paying the interest for
twenty-two years in a depreciated currency: those of the second,
suffered an injury during the years in which the interest was paid in a
currency more depreciated than that in which the loans were contracted.
To have resumed cash payments at a lower standard would have been to
perpetuate the injury to these two Edition: current; Page: [568] classes
of creditors, in order to avoid giving an undue benefit to a third
class, who had lent their money during the few years of greatest
depreciation. As it is, there was an underpayment to one set of persons,
and an overpayment to another. The late Mr. Mushet took the trouble to
make an arithmetical comparison between the two amounts. He ascertained
by calculation, that if an account had been made out in 1819, of what
the fundholders had gained and lost by the variation of the paper
currency from its standard, they would have been found as a body to have
been losers; so that if any compensation was due on the ground of
depreciation, it would not be lfroml the fundholders collectively, but
mtom them.

Thus it is with the facts of the case. But these reasons of fact are not
the strongest. There is a reason of principle, still more powerful.
Suppose that, not a part of the debt merely, but the whole, had been
contracted in a depreciated currency, depreciated not only in comparison
with its standard, but with its own value before and after; and that we
nweren now paying the interest of this debt in a currency fifty or even
a hundred per cent more valuable than that in which it was contracted.
What difference would this make in the obligation of paying it, if the
condition that it should be so paid was part of the original compact?
Now this is not only truth, but less than the truth. The compact
stipulated better terms for the fundholder than he has received. During
the whole continuance of the Bank restriction, there was a parliamentary
pledge, by which the legislature was as much bound as any legislature is
capable of binding itself, that cash payments should be resumed on the
original footing, at farthest in six months after the conclusion of a
general peace. This was therefore an actual condition of every loan; and
the terms of the oloano were more favourable in consideration of it.
Without some such stipulation, the Government could not have expected to
borrow, unless on the terms on which ploans are madep to the native
princes of India. If it had been understood and avowed that, after
borrowing the money, the standard at which it was qcommutedq might be
permanently lowered, to any extent which to the “collective wisdom” of a
legislature of borrowers might seem fit—who can say what rate of
interest would have been a sufficient inducement to rpersonsr of common
sense to risk stheirs savings in such an adventure? However much the
fundholders had gained by the resumption of cash payments, Edition:
current; Page: [569] the terms of the contract insured their giving
ample value for it. They gave value for more than they received; since
cash payments were not resumed in six months, but in as many years,
after the peace. So that waving all our arguments except the last, and
conceding all the facts asserted on the other side of the question, the
fundholders, instead of being unduly benefited, are the injured party;
and would have a claim to compensation, if such claims were not very
properly barred by the impossibility of adjudication, and by the
salutary general maxim of law and policy, “quod interest reipublicæ ut
sit finis litium.”

Edition: current; Page: [570]


CHAPTER XIV: Of Excess of Supply

§ 1. [Can there be an oversupply of commodities generally?] After the
elementary exposition of the theory of money contained in the last few
chapters, we shall return to a question in the general theory of Value,
which could not be satisfactorily discussed until the nature and
operations of Money were in some measure understood, because the errors
against which we have to contend mainly originate in a misunderstanding
of those operations.

We have seen that the value of everything gravitates towards a certain
medium point (which has been called the Natural Value), namely, that at
which it exchanges for every other thing in the ratio of their cost of
production. We have seen, too, that the actual or market value
coincides, or nearly so, with the natural value, only on an average of
years; and is continually either rising above, or falling below it, from
alterations in the demand, or casual fluctuations in the supply: but
that these variations correct themselves, through the tendency of the
supply to accommodate itself to the demand which exists for the
commodity at its natural value. A general convergence thus results from
the balance of opposite divergences. Dearth, or scarcity, on the one
hand, and over-supply, or in mercantile language, glut, on the other,
are incident to all commodities. In the first case, the commodity
affords to the producers or sellers, while the deficiency lasts, an
unusually high rate of profit: in the second, the supply being in excess
of that for which a demand exists at such a value as will afford the
ordinary profit, the sellers must be content with less, and musta, in
extreme cases, submit to a loss.

Because this phenomenon of over-supply, and consequent inconvenience or
loss to the producer or dealer, may exist in the case of any one
commodity whatever, many persons, including some distinguished political
economists, have thought that it may exist with regard to all
commodities; that there may be a general over-production of wealth; a
supply of commodities in the aggregate, surpassing the demand; and a
consequent depressed condition of all classes of producers. Against this
doctrine, of which Mr. Malthus and Dr. Chalmers in this country, and M.
de Sismondi Edition: current; Page: [571] on the Continent, were the
chief apostles, I have already contended in the First Book;* but it was
not possible, in that stage of our inquiry, to enter into a complete
examination of an error (as I conceive) essentially grounded on a
misunderstanding of the phenomena of Value and Price.

The doctrine appears to me to involve so much inconsistency in its very
conception, that I feel considerable difficulty in giving any statement
of it which shall be at once clear, and satisfactory to its supporters.
They agree in maintaining that there may be, and sometimes is, an excess
of productions in general beyond the demand for them; that when this
happens, purchasers cannot be found at prices which will repay the cost
of production with a profit; that there ensues a general depression of
prices or values (they are seldom accurate in discriminating between the
two), so that producers, the more they produce, find themselves the
poorer, instead of richer; and Dr. Chalmers accordingly inculcates on
capitalists the practice of a moral restraint in reference to the
pursuit of gain; while Sismondi deprecates machinery, and the various
inventions which increase productive power. They both maintain that
accumulation of capital may proceed too fast, not merely for the moral,
but for the material interests of those who produce and accumulate; and
they enjoin the rich to guard against this evil by an ample unproductive
consumption.

§ 2. [The supply of commodities in general cannot exceed the power of
purchase] When these writers speak of the supply of commodities as
outrunning the demand, it is not clear which of the two elements of
demand they have in view—the desire to possess, or the means of
purchase; whether their meaning is that there are, in such cases, more
consumable products in existence than the public desires to consume, or
merely more than it is able to pay for. In this uncertainty, it is
necessary to examine both suppositions.

First, let us suppose that the quantity of commodities produced is not
greater than the community would be glad to consume: is it, in that
case, possible that there should be a deficiency of demand for all
commodities, for want of the means of payment? Those who think so cannot
have considered what it is which constitutes the means of payment for
commodities. It is simply commodities. Each person’s means of paying for
the productions of other people consists of those which he himself
possesses. All sellers are inevitably and ex vi termini buyers. Could we
suddenly double the productive powers of the country, we should double
the supply of commodities in every market; but we should, by the same
stroke, double the purchasing power. Everybody would bring a double
demand as well as supply: everybody would be able to buy twice as much,
because every one Edition: current; Page: [572] would have twice as much
to offer in exchange. It is probable, indeed, that there would now be a
superfluity of certain things. Although the community would willingly
double its aggregate consumption, it may already have as much as it
desires of some commodities, and it may prefer to do more than double
its consumption of others, or to exercise its increased purchasing power
on some new thing. If so, the supply will adapt itself accordingly, and
the values of things will continue to conform to their cost of
production. At any rate, it is a sheer absurdity that all things should
fall in value, and that all producers should, in consequence, be
insufficiently remunerated. If values remain the same, what becomes of
prices is immaterial, since the remuneration of producers does not
depend on how much money, but on how much of consumable articles, they
obtain for their goods. Besides, money is a commodity; and if all
commodities are supposed to be doubled in quantity, we must suppose
money to be doubled too, and then prices would no more fall than values
would.

§ 3. [The supply of commodities in general never does exceed the
inclination to consume] A general over-supply, or excess of all
commodities above the demand, so far as demand consists in means of
payment, is thus shown to be an impossibility. But it may perhaps be
supposed that it is not the ability to purchase, but the desire to
possess, that falls short, and that the general produce of industry may
be greater than the community desires to consume—the part, at least, of
the community which has an equivalent to give. It is evident enough,
that produce makes a market for produce, and that there is wealth in the
country with which to purchase all the wealth in the country; but those
who have the means, may not have the wants, and those who have the wants
may be without the means. A portion, therefore, of the commodities
produced may be unable to find a market, from the absence of means in
those who have the desire to consume, and the want of desire in those
who have the means.

This is much the most plausible form of the doctrine, and does not, like
that which we first examined, involve a contradiction. There may easily
be a greater quantity of any particular commodity than is desired by
those who have the ability to purchase, and it is abstractedly
conceivable that this might be the case with all commodities. The error
is in not perceiving that though all who have an equivalent to give,
might be fully provided with every consumable article which they desire,
the fact that they go on adding to the production proves that this is
not actually the case. Assume the most favourable hypothesis for the
purpose, that of a limited community, every member of which possesses as
much of necessaries and of all known luxuries as he desires: and since
it is not conceivable that persons whose wants were completely satisfied
would labour and economize to obtain Edition: current; Page: [573] what
they did not desire, suppose that a foreigner arrives and produces an
additional quantity of something of which there was already enough.
Here, it will be said, is over-production: true, I reply;
over-production of that particular article: the community wanted no more
of that, but it wanted something. The old inhabitants, indeed, wanted
nothing; but did not the foreigner himself want something? When he
produced the superfluous article, was he labouring without a motive? He
has produced, but the wrong thing instead of the right. He wanted,
perhaps, food, and has produced watches, with which everybody was
sufficiently supplied. The new comer brought with him into the country a
demand for commodities, equal to all that he could produce by his
industry, and it was his business to see that the supply he brought
should be suitable to that demand. If he could not produce something
capable of exciting a new want or desire in the community, for the
satisfaction of which some one would grow more food and give it to him
in exchange, he had the alternative of growing food for himself; either
on fresh land, if there was any unoccupied, or as a tenant, or partner,
or servant, of some former occupier, willing to be partially relieved
from labour. He has produced a thing not wanted, instead of what was
wanted; and he himself, perhaps, is not the kind of producer who is
wanted; but there is no over-production; production is not excessive,
but merely ill assorted. We saw before, that whoever brings additional
commodities to the market, brings an additional power of purchase; we
now see that he brings also an additional desire to consume; since if he
had not that desire, he would not have troubled himself to produce.
Neither of the elements of demand, therefore, can be wanting, when there
is an additional supply; though it is perfectly possible that the demand
may be for one thing, and the supply may unfortunately consist of
another.

Driven to his last retreat, an opponent may perhaps allege, that there
are persons who produce and accumulate from mere habit; not because they
have any object in growing richer, or desire to add in any respect to
their consumption, but from vis inertiæ. They continue producing because
the machine is ready mounted, and save and re-invest their savings
because they have nothing on which they care to expend them. I grant
that this is possible, and in some few instances probably happens; but
these do not in the smallest degree affect our conclusion. For, what do
these persons do with their savings? They invest them productively; that
is, expend them in employing labour. In other words, having a purchasing
power belonging to them, more than they know what to do with, they make
over the surplus of it for the general benefit of the labouring class.
Now, will that class also not know what to do with it? Are we to suppose
that they too have their wants perfectly satisfied, and go on labouring
from mere habit? Until this is the case; until the working classes have
also reached the point of Edition: current; Page: [574] satiety—there
will be no want of demand for the produce of capital, however rapidly it
may accumulate: since, if there is nothing else for it to do, it can
always find employment in producing the necessaries or luxuries of the
labouring class. And when they too had no further desire for necessaries
or luxuries, they would take the benefit of any further increase of
wages by diminishing their work; so that the over-production which then
for the first time would be possible in idea, could not even then take
place in fact, for want of labourers. Thus, in whatever manner the
question is looked at, even though we go to the extreme verge of
possibility to invent a supposition favourable to it, the theory of
general over-production implies an absurdity.

§ 4. [Origin and explanation of the notion of general oversupply] What
then is it by which men who have reflected much on economical phenomena,
and have even contributed to throw new light upon them by original
speculations, have been led to embrace so irrational a doctrine? I
conceive them to have been deceived by a mistaken interpretation of
certain mercantile facts. They imagined that the possibility of a
general over-supply of commodities was proved by experience. They
believed that they saw this phenomenon in certain conditions of the
markets, the true explanation of which is totally different.

I have already described the state of the markets for commodities which
accompanies what is termed a commercial crisis. At such times there is
really an excess of all commodities above the money demand: in other
words, there is an under-supply of money. From the sudden annihilation
of a great mass of credit, every one dislikes to part with ready money,
and many are anxious to procure it at any sacrifice. Almost everybody
therefore is a seller, and there are scarcely any buyers; so that there
may really be, though only while the crisis lasts, an extreme depression
of general prices, from what may be indiscriminately called a glut of
commodities or a dearth of money. But it is a great error to suppose,
with Sismondi, that a commercial crisis is the effect of a general
excess of production. It is simply the consequence of an excess of
speculative purchases. It is not a gradual advent of low prices, but a
sudden recoil from prices extravagantly high: its immediate cause is a
contraction of credit, and the remedy is, not a diminution of supply,
but the restoration of confidence. It is also evident that this
temporary derangement of markets is an evil only because it is
temporary. The fall being solely of money prices, if prices did not rise
again no dealer would lose, since the smaller price would be worth as
much to him as the larger price was before. In no amannera does this
phenomenon answer to the description which these celebrated economists
Edition: current; Page: [575] have given of the evil of over-production.
bTheb permanent decline in the circumstances of producers, for want of
markets, which those writers contemplate, is a conception to which the
nature of a commercial crisis gives no support.

The other phenomenon from which the notion of a general excess of wealth
and superfluity of accumulation seems to derive countenance, is one of a
more permanent nature, namely, the fall of profits and interest which
naturally takes place with the progress of population and production.
The cause of this decline of profit is the increased cost of maintaining
labour, which results from an increase of population and of the demand
for food, outstripping the advance of agricultural improvement. This
important feature in the economical progress of nations will receive
full consideration and discussion in the succeeding Book.* It is
obviously a totally different thing from a want of market for
commodities, though often confounded with it in the complaints of the
producing and trading classes. The true interpretation of the modern or
present state of industrial economy, is, that there is hardly any amount
of business which may not be done, if people will be content to do it on
small profits; and this, all active and intelligent persons in business
perfectly well know: but even those who comply with the necessities of
their time, grumble at what they comply with, and wish that there were
less capital, or as they express it, less competition, in order that
there might be greater profits. Low profits, however, are a different
thing from deficiency of demand; and the production and accumulation
which merely reduce profits, cannot be called excess of supply or of
production. What the phenomenon really is, and its effects and necessary
limits, will be seen when we treat of that express subject.

I know not of any economical facts, except the two I have specified,
which can have given occasion to the opinion that a general
over-production of commodities ever presented itself in actual
experience. I am convinced that there is no fact in commercial affairs,
which, in order to its explanation, stands in need of that chimerical
supposition.

The point is fundamental; any difference of opinion on it involves
radically different conceptions of Political Economy, especially in its
practical aspect. On the one view, we have only to consider how a
sufficient production may be combined with the best possible
distribution; but on the other there is a third thing to be
considered—how a market can be created for produce, or how production
can be limited to the capabilities of the market. Besides; a theory so
essentially self-contradictory cannot intrude itself without carrying
confusion into the very heart of the subject, and making it impossible
even to conceive with any distinctness many of the Edition: current;
Page: [576] more complicated economical workings of society. This error
has been, I conceive, fatal to the systems, as systems, of the three
distinguished economists to whom I before referred, Malthus, Chalmers,
and Sismondi; all of whom have admirably conceived and explained several
of the elementary theorems of political economy, but this fatal
misconception has spread itself like a veil between them and the more
difficult portions of the subject, not suffering one ray of light to
penetrate. Still more is cthisc same confused idea constantly crossing
and bewildering the speculations of minds inferior to theirs. It is but
justice to two eminent names, to call attention to the fact, that the
merit of having placed this most important point in its true light,
belongs principally, on the Continent, to the judicious J. B. Say, and
in this country to Mr. Mill; who (besides the conclusive exposition
which he gave of the subject in his Elements of Political Economy) had
set forth the correct doctrine with great force and clearness in an
early pamphlet, called forth by a temporary controversy, and entitled,
“Commerce Defended;”[*] the first of his writings which attained any
celebrity, and which he prized more as having been his first
introduction to the friendship of David Ricardo, the most valued and
most intimate friendship of his life.

Edition: current; Page: [577]


CHAPTER XV: Of a Measure of Value

§ 1. [In what sense a Measure of Exchange Value is possible] There has
been much discussion among political economists respecting a Measure of
Value. An importance has been attached to the subject, greater than it
deserved, and what has been written respecting it has contributed not a
little to the reproach of logomachy, which is brought, with much
exaggeration, but not altogether without ground, against the
speculations of political economists. It is necessary however to touch
upon the subject, if only to show how little there is to be said on it.

A Measure of Value, in the ordinary sense of the word measure, would
mean, something, by comparison with which we may ascertain what is the
value of any other thing. When we consider farther, that value itself is
relative, and that two things are necessary to constitute it,
independently of the third thing which is to measure it; we may define a
Measure of Value to be something, by comparing with which any two other
things, we may infer their value in relation to one another.

In this sense, any commodity will serve as a measure of value at a given
time and place; since we can always infer the proportion in which things
exchange for one another, when we know the proportion in which each
exchanges for any third thing. To serve as a convenient measure of value
is one of the functions of the commodity selected as a medium of
exchange. It is in that commodity that the values of all other things
are habitually estimated. We say that one thing is worth 2l., another
3l.; and it is then known without express statement, that one is worth
two-thirds of the other, or that the things exchange for one another in
the proportion of 2 to 3. Money is a complete measure of their value.

But the desideratum sought by political economists is not a measure of
the value of things at the same time and place, but a measure of the
value of the same thing at different times and places: something by
comparison with which it may be known whether any given thing is of
greater or less value now than a century ago, or in this country than in
America or China. And for this also, money, or any other commodity, will
serve quite as well as at the same time and place, provided we can
obtain the same data; provided we are able to compare with the measure
not one Edition: current; Page: [578] commodity only, but the two or
more which are necessary to the idea of value. If wheat is now a40s.a
the quarter, and a fat sheep the same, and if in the time of Henry the
Second wheat was 20s., and a sheep 10s., we know that a quarter of wheat
was then worth two sheep, and is now only worth one, and that the value
therefore of a sheep, estimated in wheat, is twice as great as it was
then; quite independently of the value of money at the two periods,
either in relation to those two articles (in respect to both of which we
suppose it to have fallen), or to other commodities, in respect to which
we need not make any supposition.

What seems to be desired, however, by writers on the subject, is some
means of ascertaining the value of a commodity by merely comparing it
with the measure, without referring it specially to any other given
commodity. They would wish to be able, from the mere fact that wheat is
now b40s.b the quarter, and was formerly 20s., to decide whether wheat
has varied in its value, and in what degree, without selecting a second
commodity, such as a sheep, to compare it with; because they are
cdesirous of knowing, notc how much wheat has varied in value relatively
to sheep, but how much it has varied relatively to things in general.

The first obstacle arises from the necessary indefiniteness of the idea
of general exchange value—value in relation not to some one commodity,
but to commodities at large. Even if we knew exactly how much a quarter
of wheat would have purchased at the earlier period, of every marketable
article considered separately, and that it will now purchase more of
some things and less of others, we should often find it impossible to
say whether it had risen or fallen in relation to things in general. How
much more impossible, when we only know how it has varied in relation to
the measure. To enable the money price of a thing at two different
periods to measure the quantity of things in general which it will
exchange for, the same sum of money must correspond at both periods to
the same quantity of things in general, that is, money must always have
the same exchange value, the same general purchasing power. Now, not
only is this not true of money, or of any other commodity, but we cannot
devend suppose any state of circumstances in which it would be true.

§ 2. [A Measure of Cost of Production] A measure of exchange value,
therefore, being impossible, writers have formed a notion of something,
under the name of a measure of value, which would be more properly
Edition: current; Page: [579] termed a measure of cost of production.
They have imagined a commodity invariably produced by the same quantity
of labour; to which supposition it is necessary to add, that the fixed
capital employed in the production must bear always the same proportion
to the wages of the immediate labour, and must be always of the same
durability: in short, the same capital must be advanced for the same
length of time, so that the element of value which consists of profits,
as well as that which consists of wages, may be unchangeable. We should
then have a commodity always produced under one and the same combination
of all the circumstances which affect permanent value. Such a commodity
would be by no means constant in its exchange value; for (even without
reckoning the atemporarya fluctuations arising from supply and demand)
its exchange value would be altered by every change in the circumstances
of production of the things against which it was exchanged. But if there
existed such a commodity, we should derive this advantage from it, that
whenever any other thing varied bpermanentlyb in relation to it, we
should know that the cause of variation was not in it, but in the other
thing. It would thus be csuitedc to serve as a measure, not indeed of
the value of other things, but of their cost of production. If a
commodity acquired a greater permanent purchasing power in relation to
the invariable commodity, its cost of production must have become
greater; and in the contrary case, less. This measure of cost, is what
political economists have generally meant by a measure of value.

But a measure of cost, though perfectly conceivable, can no more exist
in fact, than a measure of exchange value. There is no commodity which
is invariable in its cost of production. Gold dand silver are the least
variable, but even these are liable to changes in theird cost of
production, from the exhaustion of old esources of supplye, the
discovery of new, and improvements in the mode of working. If we attempt
to ascertain the changes in the cost of production of any commodity from
the changes in its money price, the conclusion will require to be
corrected by the best allowance we can make for the intermediate changes
in the cost of the production of money itself.

Adam Smith fancied that there were two commodities peculiarly fitted to
serve as a measure of value: corn, and labour. Of corn, he said that
although its value fluctuates much from year to year, it does not vary
greatly from century to century. This we now know to be an error: corn
tends to Edition: current; Page: [580] rise in cost of production with
every increase of population, and to fall with every improvement in
agriculture, either in the country itself, or in any foreign country
from which it draws a portion of its supplies. The supposed constancy of
the cost of fthef production of corn depends on the maintenance of a
complete equipoise between these antagonizing forces, an equipoise
which, if ever realized, can only be accidental. With respect to labour
as a measure of value, the language of Adam Smith is not uniform. He
sometimes speaks of it as a good measure only for short periods, saying
that the value of labour (or wages) does not vary much from year to
year, though it does from generation to generation. On other occasions
he speaks as if labour were intrinsically the most proper measure of
value, on the ground that one day’s ordinary muscular exertion of one
man, may be looked upon as always, to him, the same amount of effort or
sacrifice. But this proposition, whether in itself admissible or not,
discards the idea of exchange value altogether, substituting a totally
different idea, more analogous to value in use. If a day’s labour will
purchase in America twice as much of ordinary consumable articles as in
England, it seems a vain subtlety to insist on saying that labour is of
the same value in both countries, and that it is the value of the other
things which is different. Labour, in this case, may be correctly said
to be twice as valuable, both in the market and to the labourer himself,
in America as in England.

If the object were to obtain an approximate measure by which to estimate
value in use, perhaps nothing better could be chosen than one day’s
subsistence of an average man, reckoned in the ordinary food consumed by
the class of unskilled labourers. If in gany countryg a pound of maize
flour will support a labouring man for a day, a thing might be deemed
more or less valuable in proportion to the number of pounds of maize
flour it exchanged for. If one thing, either by itself or by what it
would purchase, could maintain a labouring man for a day, and another
could maintain him for a week, there would be some reason in saying that
the one was worth, for ordinary human uses, seven times as much as the
other. But this would not measure the worth of the thing to its
possessor for his own purposes, which might be greater to any amount,
though it could not be less, than the worth of the food which the thing
would purchase.

The idea of a Measure of Value must not be confounded with the idea of
the regulator, or determining principle, of value. When it is said by
Ricardo and others, that the value of a thing is regulated by quantity
of labour, they do not mean the quantity of labour for which the thing
will exchange, but the quantity required for producing it. This, they
mean to Edition: current; Page: [581] affirm, determines its value;
causes it to be of the value it is, and of no other. But when Adam Smith
and Malthus say that labour is a measure of value, they do not mean the
labour by which the thing was or can be made, but the quantity of labour
which it will exchange for, or purchase; in other words the value of the
thing, estimated in labour. And they do not mean that this regulates the
general exchange value of the thing, or has any effect in determining
what that value shall be, but only ascertains what it is, and whether
and how much it varies from time to time and from place to place. To
confound these two ideas, would be much the same thing as to overlook
the distinction between the thermometer and the fire.

Edition: current; Page: [582]


CHAPTER XVI: Of Some Peculiar Cases of Value

§ 1. [Values of Commodities which have a joint cost of production] The
general laws of value, in all the more important cases of the
interchange of commodities in the same country, have now been
investigated. We examined, first, the case of monopoly, in which the
value is determined by either a natural or an artificial limitation of
quantity, that is, by demand and supply; secondly, the case of free
competition, when the article can be produced in indefinite quantity at
the same cost; in which case the permanent value is determined by the
cost of production, and only the fluctuations by supply and demand;
thirdly, a mixed case, that of the articles which can be produced in
indefinite quantity, but not at the same cost; in which case the
permanent value is determined by the greatest cost which it is necessary
to incur in order to obtain the required supply. And lastly, we have
found that money itself is a commodity of the third class; that its
value, in a state of freedom, is governed by the same laws as the values
of other commodities of its class; and that prices, therefore, follow
the same laws as values.

From this it appears that demand and supply govern the fluctuations of
values and prices in all cases, and the permanent values and prices of
all things of which the supply is determined by any agency other than
that of free competition: but that, under the régime of competition,
things are, on the average, exchanged for each other at such values, and
sold at such prices, as afford equal expectation of advantage to all
classes of producers; which can only be when things exchange for one
another in the ratio of their cost of production.

It is now, however, necessary to take notice of certain cases, to which,
from their peculiar nature, this law of exchange value is inapplicable.

It sometimes happens that two different commodities have what may be
termed a joint cost of production. They are both products of the same
operation, or set of operations, and the outlay is incurred for the sake
of both together, not part for one and part for the other. The same
outlay would have to be incurred for either of the two, if the other
were not wanted or used at all. There are not a few instances of
commodities thus associated in their production. For example, coke and
coal-gas are both Edition: current; Page: [583] produced from the same
material, and by the same operation. In a more partial sense, mutton and
wool are an example: beef, hides, and tallow: calves and dairy produce:
chickens and eggs. Cost of production can have nothing to do with
deciding the value of the associated commodities relatively to each
other. It only decides their joint value. The gas and the coke together
have to repay the expenses of their production, with the ordinary
profit. To do this, a given quantity of gas, together with the coke
which is the residuum of its manufacture, must exchange for other things
in the ratio of their joint cost of production. But how much of the
remuneration of the producer shall be derived from the coke, and how
much from the gas, remains to be decided. Cost of production does not
determine their prices, but the sum of their prices. A principle is
wanting to apportion the expenses of production between the two.

Since cost of production here fails us, we must revert to a law of value
anterior to cost of production, and more fundamental, the law of demand
and supply. aThea law is, that the demand for a commodity varies with
its value, and that the value adjusts itself so that the demand shall be
equal to the supply. This supplies the principle of repartition which we
are in quest of.

Suppose that a certain quantity of gas is produced and sold at a certain
price, and that the residuum of coke is offered at a price which,
together with that of the gas, repays the expenses with the ordinary
rate of profit. Suppose, too, that at the price put upon the gas and
coke respectively, the whole of the gas finds an easy market, without
either surplus or deficiency, but that purchasers cannot be found for
all the coke corresponding to it. The coke will be offered at a lower
price in order to force a market. But this lower price, together with
the price of the gas, will not be remunerating: the manufacture, as a
whole, will not pay its expenses with the ordinary profit, and will not,
on these terms, continue to be carried on. The gas, therefore, must be
sold at a higher price, to make up for the deficiency on the coke. The
demand consequently contracting, the production will be somewhat
reduced; and prices will become stationary when, by the joint effect of
the rise of gas and the fall of coke, so much less of the first is sold,
and so much more of the second, that there is now a market for all the
coke which results from the existing extent of the gas manufacture.

Or suppose the reverse case; that more coke is wanted at the present
prices, than can be supplied by the operations required by the existing
demand for gas. Coke, being now in deficiency, will rise in price. The
whole operation will yield more than the usual rate of profit, and
additional capital will be attracted to the manufacture. The unsatisfied
demand for coke will be supplied; but this cannot be done without
increasing the supply of gas Edition: current; Page: [584] too; and as
the existing demand was fully supplied already, an increased quantity
can only find a market by lowering the price. The result will be that
the two together will yield the return required by their joint cost of
production, but that more of this return than before will be furnished
by the coke, and less by the gas. Equilibrium will be attained when the
demand for each article fits so well with the demand for the other, that
the quantity required of each is exactly as much as is generated in
producing the quantity required of the other. If there is any surplus or
deficiency on either side; if there is a demand for coke, and not a
demand for all the gas produced along with it, or vice versâ; the values
and prices of the two things will so readjust themselves that both shall
find a market.

When, therefore, two or more commodities have a joint cost of
production, their natural values relatively to each other are those
which will create a demand for each, in the ratio of the quantities in
which they are sent forth by the productive process. This theorem is not
in itself of any great importance: but the illustration it affords of
the law of demand, and of the mode in which, when cost of production
fails to be applicable, btheb other principle steps in to supply the
vacancy, is worthy of particular attention, as we shall find in the next
chapter but one that something very similar takes place in cases of much
greater moment.

§ 2. [Values of the different kinds of agricultural produce] Another
case of values which merits attention, is that of the different kinds of
agricultural produce. This is rather a more complex question that the
last, and requires that attention should be paid to a greater number of
influencing circumstances.

The case would present nothing peculiar, if different agricultural
products were either grown indiscriminately and with equal advantage on
the same soils, or wholly on different soils. The difficulty arises from
two things: first, that most soils are fitter for one kind of produce
than another, without being absolutely unfit for any; and secondly, the
rotation of crops.

For simplicity, we will confine our supposition to two kinds of
agricultural produce; for instance, wheat and oats. If all soils were
equally adapted for wheat and for oats, both would be grown
indiscriminately on all soils, and their relative cost of production,
being the same everywhere, would govern their relative value. If the
same labour which grows three quarters of wheat on any given soil, would
always grow on that soil five quarters of oats, the three and the five
quarters would be of the same value. If again, wheat and oats could not
be grown on the same soil at all, the value of each would be determined
by its peculiar cost of production on the least favourable of the soils
adapted for it which the existing demand Edition: current; Page: [585]
required a recourse to. The fact, however, is that both wheat and oats
can be grown on almost any soil which is capable of producing either:
but some soils, such as the stiff clays, are better adapted for wheat,
while others (the light sandy soils) are more suitable for oats. There
amighta be some soils which bwouldb yield, to the same quantity of
labour, only four quarters of oats to three of wheat; others perhaps
less than three of wheat to five quarters of oats. Among these
diversities, what determines the relative value of the two things?

It is evident that each grain will be cultivated in preference, on the
soils which are better adapted for it than for the other; and if the
demand is supplied from these alone, the values of the two grains will
have no reference to one another. But when the demand for both is such
as to require that each should be grown not only on the soils peculiarly
fitted for it, but on the medium soils which, without being specifically
adapted to either, are about equally suited for both, the cost of
production on those medium soils will determine the relative value of
the two grains; while the rent of the soils specifically adapted to
each, will be regulated by their productive power, considered with
reference to that one alone to which they are peculiarly applicable.
Thus far the question presents no difficulty, to any one to whom the
general principles of value are familiar.

It may happen, however, that the demand for one of the two, as for
example wheat, may so outstrip the demand for the other, as not only to
occupy the soils specially suited for wheat, but to engross entirely
those equally suitable to both, and even encroach upon those which are
better adapted to oats. To create an inducement for this unequal
apportionment of the cultivation, wheat must be relatively dearer, and
oats cheaper, than according to the cost of their production on the
medium land. Their relative value must be in proportion to the cost on
that quality of land, whatever it may be, on which the comparative
demand for the two grains requires that both of them should be grown.
If, from the state of the demand, the two cultivations meet on land more
favourable to one than to the other, that one will be cheaper and the
other dearer, in relation to each other and to things in general, than
if the proportional demand were as we at first supposed.

Here, then, we obtain a fresh illustration, in a somewhat different
manner, of the operation of demand, not as an occasional disturber of
value, but as a permanent regulator of it, conjoined with, or
supplementary to, cost of production.

The case of rotation of crops does not require separate analysis, being
a case of joint cost of production, like that of gas and coke. If it
were the Edition: current; Page: [586] practice to grow white and green
crops on all clandsc in alternate years, the one being necessary as much
for the sake of the other as for its own sake; the farmer would derive
his remuneration for two years’ expenses from one white and one green
crop, and the prices of the two would so adjust themselves as to create
a demand which would carry off an equal dbreadthd of white and of green
crops.

There would be little difficulty in finding other anomalous cases of
value, which it might be a useful exercise to resolve: but it is neither
desirable nor possible, in a work like the present, to enter more into
details than is necessary for the elucidation of principles. I now
therefore proceed to the only part of the general theory of exchange
which has not yet been touched upon, that of International Exchanges, or
to speak more generally, exchanges between distant places.

Edition: current; Page: [587]


CHAPTER XVII: Of International Trade

§ 1. [Cost of production is not the regulator of international values]
The causes which occasion a commodity to be brought from a distance,
instead of being produced, as convenience would seem to dictate, as near
as possible to the market where it is to be sold for consumption, are
usually conceived in a rather superficial manner. Some things it is
physically impossible to produce, except in particular circumstances of
heat, soil, water, or atmosphere. But there are many things which,
though they could be produced at home without difficulty, and in any
quantity, are yet imported from a distance. The explanation which would
be popularly given of this would be, that it is cheaper to import than
to produce them: and this is the true reason. But this reason itself
requires that a reason be given for it. Of two things produced in the
same place, if one is cheaper than the other, the reason is that it can
be produced with less labour and capital, or, in a word, at less cost.
Is this also the reason as between things produced in different places?
Are things never imported but from places where they can be produced
with less labour (or less of the other element of cost, time) than in
the place to which they are brought? Does the law, that permanent value
is proportioned to cost of production, hold good between commodities
produced in distant places, as it does between those produced in
adjacent places?

We shall find that it does not. A thing may sometimes be sold cheapest,
by being produced in some other place than that at which it can be
produced with the smallest amount of labour and abstinence. England
might import corn from Poland and pay for it in cloth, even though
aEnglanda had a decided advantage over Poland in the production of both
the one and the other. England might send cottons to Portugal in
exchange for wine, although Portugal might be able to produce cottons
with a less amount of labour and capital than England could.

This could not happen between adjacent places. If the north bank of the
Thames possessed an advantage over the south bank in the production of
shoes, no shoes would be produced on the south side; the shoemakers
would remove themselves and their capitals to the north bank, or would
have established themselves there originally; for being competitors in
the Edition: current; Page: [588] same market with those on the north
side, they could not compensate themselves for their disadvantage at the
expense of the consumer: the amount of it would fall entirely on their
profits; and they would not long content themselves with a smaller
profit, when, by simply crossing a river, they could increase it. But
between distant places, and especially between different countries,
profits may continue different; because persons do not usually remove
themselves or their capitals to a distant place, without a very strong
motive. If capital bremovedb to remote parts of the world as readily,
and for as small an inducement, as it moves to another quarter of the
same town; if people would transport their manufactories to America or
China whenever they could save a small percentage in their expenses by
it; profits would be alike c(or equivalent)c all over the world, and all
things would be produced in the places where the same labour and capital
would produce them in greatest quantity and of best quality. A tendency
may, even now, be observed towards such a state of things; capital is
becoming more and more cosmopolitan; there is so much greater similarity
of manners and institutions than formerly, and so much less alienation
of feeling, among the more civilized countries, that both population and
capital dnow move from one of those countries to another on much less
temptation than heretofore. But there are still extraordinary
differences, both of wages and of profits, between different parts of
the world. It needs but a small motive to transplant capital, or even
persons, from Warwickshire to Yorkshire; but a much greater to make them
remove to India, the colonies, or Ireland. To France, Germany, or
Switzerland, capital moves perhaps almost as readily as to the colonies;
the difference of language and government being scarcely so great a
hindrance as climate and distance. To countries still barbarous, or,
like Russia or Turkey, only beginning to be civilized, capital will not
migrate, unless under the inducement of a very great extra profit.

Between all distant places therefore in some degree, but especially
between different countries (whether under the same supreme government
or not,) there may exist great inequalities in the return to labour and
capital, without causing them to move from one place to the other in
such quantity as to level those inequalities. The capital belonging to a
country will, to a great extent, remain in the country, even if there be
no mode of employing it in which it would not be more productive
elsewhere. Yet even a country thus circumstanced might, and probably
would, carry on trade with other countries. It would export articles of
some sort, even to places which could make them with less labour than
itself; because those countries, supposing them to have an advantage
over it in all productions, would have a greater advantage in some
things than in others, and would find it their interest to import the
articles in which their advantage was smallest, that Edition: current;
Page: [589] they might employ more of their labour and capital on those
in which it was greatest.

§ 2. [Interchange of commodities between distant places is determined by
differences not in their absolute, but in their comparative, cost of
production] As I have said elsewhere* after Ricardo (the athinker who
has done mosta towards clearing up this subject)† “it is not a
difference in the absolute cost of production, which determines the
interchange, but a difference in the comparative cost. It may be to our
advantage to procure iron from Sweden in exchange for cottons, even
although the mines of England as well as her manufactories should be
more productive than those of Sweden; for if we have an advantage of
one-half in cottons, and only an advantage of a quarter in iron, and
could sell our cottons to Sweden at the price which Sweden must pay for
them if she produced them herself, we should obtain our iron with an
advantage of one-half as well as our cottons. We may often, by trading
with foreigners, obtain their commodities at a smaller expense of labour
and capital than they cost to the foreigners themselves. The bargain is
still advantageous to the foreigner, because the commodity which he
receives in exchange, though it has cost us less, would have cost him
more.”[*]

To illustrate the cases in which interchange of commodities will not,
and those in which it will, take place between two countries, Mr. Mill,
in his Elements of Political Economy,‡ makes the supposition that Poland
has an advantage over England in the production bboth ofb cloth and of
corn. He first supposes the advantage to be of equal amount in both
commodities; the cloth and the corn, each of which required 100 days’
labour in Poland, requiring each 150 days’ labour in England. “It would
Edition: current; Page: [590] follow, that the cloth of 150 days’ labour
in England, if sent to Poland, would be equal to the cloth of 100 days’
labour in Poland; if exchanged for corn, therefore, it would exchange
for the corn of only 100 days’ labour. But the corn of 100 days’ labour
in Poland, was supposed to be the same quantity with that of 150 days’
labour in England. With 150 days’ labour in cloth, therefore, England
would only get as much corn in Poland, as she could raise with 150 days’
labour at home; and she would, in importing it, have the cost of
carriage besides. In these circumstances no exchange would take place.”
In this case the comparative costs of the two articles in England and in
Poland were supposed to be the same, though the absolute costs were
different; on which supposition we see that there would be no labour
saved to either country, by confining its industry to one of the two
productions, and importing the other.

It is otherwise when the comparative, and not merely the absolute costs
of the two articles are different in the two countries. “If,” continues
the same author, “while the cloth produced with 100 days’ labour in
Poland was produced with 150 days’ labour in England, the corn which was
produced in Poland with 100 days’ labour could not be produced in
England with less than 200 days’ labour; an adequate motive to exchange
would immediately arise. With a quantity of cloth which England produced
with 150 days’ labour, she would be able to purchase as much corn in
Poland as was there produced with 100 days’ labour; but the quantity
which was there produced with 100 days’ labour, would be as great as the
quantity produced in England with 200 days’ labour.” By importing corn,
therefore, from Poland, and paying for it with cloth, England would
obtain for 150 days’ labour what would otherwise cost her 200; being a
saving of 50 days’ labour on each repetition of the transaction: and not
merely a saving to England, but a saving absolutely; for it is not
obtained at the expense of Poland, who, with corn that costs her 100
days’ labour, has purchased cloth which, if produced at home, would have
cost her the same. Poland, therefore, on this supposition, loses
nothing; but also she derives no advantage from the trade, the imported
cloth costing her as much as if it were made at home. To enable Poland
to gain anything by the interchange, something must be abated from the
gain of England: the corn produced in Poland by 100 days’ labour, must
be able to purchase from England more cloth than Poland could produce by
that amount of labour; more therefore than England could produce by 150
days’ labour, England thus obtaining the corn which would have cost her
200 days, at a cost exceeding 150, though short of 200. England
therefore no longer gains the whole of the labour which is saved to the
two jointly by trading with one another.

§ 3. [The direct benefits of commerce consist in increased efficiency of
the productive powers of the world] From this exposition we perceive in
Edition: current; Page: [591] what consists the benefit of international
exchange, or in other words, foreign commerce. Setting aside its
enabling countries to obtain commodities which they could not themselves
produce at all; its advantage consists in a more efficient employment of
the productive forces of the world. If two countries which trade
together attempted, as far as was physically possible, to produce for
themselves what they now import from one another, the labour and capital
of the two countries would not be so productive, the two together would
not obtain from their industry so great a quantity of commodities, as
when each employs itself in producing, both for itself and for the
other, the things in which its labour is relatively most efficient. The
addition thus made to the produce of the two combined, constitutes the
advantage of the trade. It is possible that one of the two countries may
be altogether inferior to the other in productive capacities, and that
its labour and capital could be employed to greatest advantage by being
removed bodily to the other. The labour and capital which have been sunk
in rendering Holland habitable, would have produced a much greater
return if transported to America or Ireland. The produce of the whole
world would be greatera, or the labour less,a than it is, if everything
were produced where there is the greatest absolute facility for its
production. But nations do not, at least in modern times, emigrate en
masse; and while the labour and capital of a country remain in the
country, they are most beneficially employed in producing, for foreign
markets as well as for its own, the things in which it lies under the
least disadvantage, if there be none in which it possesses an advantage.

§ 4. [The direct benefits of commerce do not consist in a vent for
exports, or in the gains of merchants] Before proceeding further, let us
contrast this view of the benefits of international commerce with other
theories which have prevailed, and which to a certain extent still
prevail, on the same subject.

According to the doctrine now stated, the only direct advantage of
foreign commerce consists in the imports. A country obtains things which
it either could not have produced at all, or which it must have produced
at a greater expense of capital and labour than the cost of the things
which it exports to pay for them. It thus obtains a more ample supply of
the commodities it wants, for the same labour and capital; or the same
supply, for less labour and capital, leaving the surplus disposable to
produce other things. The vulgar theory disregards this benefit, and
deems the advantage of commerce to reside in the exports: as if not what
a country obtains, but what it parts with, by its foreign trade, was
supposed to constitute the gain to it. An extended market for its
produce—an abundant consumption for its goods—a vent for its surplus—are
the phrases by which it has been Edition: current; Page: [592] customary
to designate the uses and recommendations of commerce with foreign
countries. This notion is intelligible, when we consider that the
authors and leaders of opinion on mercantile questions have always
hitherto been the selling class. It is in truth a surviving relic of the
Mercantile Theory, according to which, money being the only wealth,
selling, or in other words, exchanging goods for money, was (to
countries without mines of their own) the only way of growing rich—and
importation of goods, that is to say, parting with money, was so much
subtracted from the benefit.

The notion that money alone is wealth, has been long defunct, but it has
left many of its progeny behind it; and even its destroyer, Adam Smith,
retained some opinions which it is impossible to trace to any other
origin. Adam Smith’s theory of the benefit of foreign trade, was that it
afforded an outlet for the surplus produce of a country, and enabled a
portion of the capital of the country to replace itself with a profit.
These expressions suggest ideas inconsistent with a clear conception of
the phenomena. The expression, surplus produce, seems to imply that a
country is under some kind of necessity of producing the corn or cloth
which it exports; so that the portion which it does not itself consume,
if not wanted and consumed elsewhere, would either be produced in sheer
waste, or if it were not produced, the corresponding portion of capital
would remain idle, and the mass of productions in the country would be
diminished by so much. Either of these suppositions would be entirely
erroneous. The country produces an exportable article in excess of its
own wants, from no inherent necessity, but as the cheapest mode of
supplying itself with other things. If prevented from exporting this
surplus, it would cease to produce it, and would no longer import
anything, being unable to give an equivalent; but the labour and capital
which had been employed in producing with a view to exportation, would
find aemployment in producing those desirable objects which were
previously brought from abroad: or, if some of them could not be
produced, in producing substitutes for them. These articles would of
course be produced at a greater cost than that of the things with which
they had previously been purchased from foreign countries. But the value
and price of the articles would rise in proportion; and the capital
would just as much be replaced, with the ordinary profit from the
returns, as it was when employed in producing for the foreign market.
The only losers (after the temporary inconvenience of the change) would
be the consumers of the heretofore imported articles; who would be
obliged either to do without them, consuming in lieu of them something
which they did not like basb well, or to pay a higher price for them
than before.

There is much misconception in the common notion of what commerce does
for a country. When commerce is spoken of as a source of national
wealth, the imagination fixes itself upon the large fortunes acquired by
Edition: current; Page: [593] merchants, rather than upon the saving of
price to consumers. But the gains of merchants, when they enjoy no
exclusive privilege, are no greater than the profits obtained by the
employment of capital in the country itself. If it be said that the
capital now employed in foreign trade could not find employment in
supplying the home market, I might reply, that this is the fallacy of
general over-production, discussed in a former chapter: but the thing is
in this particular case too evident, to require an appeal to any general
theory. We not only see that the capital of the merchant would find
employment, but we see what employment. There would be employment
created, equal to that which would be taken away. Exportation ceasing,
importation to an equal value would cease also, and all that part of the
income of the country which had been expended in imported commodities,
would be ready to expend itself on the same things produced at home, or
on others instead of them. Commerce is virtually a mode of cheapening
production; and in all such cases the consumer is the person ultimately
benefited; the dealer, in the end, is sure to get his profit, whether
the buyer obtains much or little for his money. This is said without
prejudice to the effect (already touched upon, and to be hereafter fully
discussed) which the cheapening of commodities may have in raising
profits; in the case when the commodity cheapened, being one of those
consumed by labourers, enters into the cost of labour, by which the rate
of profits is determined.

§ 5. [Indirect benefits of commerce, economical and moral, are still
greater than the direct] Such, then, is the direct economical advantage
of foreign trade. But there are, besides, indirect effects, which must
be counted as benefits of a high order. One is, the tendency of every
extension of the market to improve the processes of production. A
country which produces for a larger market than its own, can introduce a
more extended division of labour, can make greater use of machinery, and
is more likely to make inventions and improvements in the processes of
production. Whatever causes a greater quantity of anything to be
produced in the same place, tends to the general increase of the
productive powers of the world.* There is another consideration,
principally applicable to an early stage of industrial advancement. A
people may be in a quiescent, indolent, uncultivated state, with aall
their tastes beither fully satisfied or entirely undeveloped, and they
may fail to put forth the whole of their productive energies for want of
any sufficient object of desire. The opening of a foreign trade, by
making them acquainted with new objects, or tempting them by the easier
acquisition of things which they had not previously thought attainable,
sometimes works a csort ofc industrial revolution in a country Edition:
current; Page: [594] whose resources were previously undeveloped for
want of energy and ambition in the people: inducing those who were
satisfied with scanty comforts and little work, to work harder for the
gratification of their new tastes, and even to save, and accumulate
capital, for the still more complete satisfaction of those tastes at a
future time.

But the economical advantages of commerce are surpassed in importance by
those of its effects which are intellectual and moral. It is hardly
possible to overrate the value, din the present low state of human
improvement, of placing human beings ind contact with persons dissimilar
to themselves, and with modes of thought and action unlike those with
which they are familiar. Commerce is now what war once was, the
principal source of this contact. Commercial adventurers from more
advanced countries have generally been the first civilizers of
barbarians. And commerce is the purpose of the far greater part of the
communication which takes place between civilized nations. Such
communication has always been, and is peculiarly in the present age, one
of the primary sources of progress. To ehuman beingse, who, as hitherto
educated, can scarcely cultivate even a good quality without running it
into a fault, it is indispensable to be perpetually comparing ftheirf
own notions and customs with the experience and example of persons in
different circumstances from gthemselvesg: and there is no nation which
does not need to borrow from others, not merely particular arts or
practices, but essential points of character in which its own type is
inferior. Finally, commerce first taught nations to see with good will
the wealth and prosperity of one another. Before, the patrioth, unless
sufficiently advanced in culture to feel the world his country,h wished
all countries weak, poor, and ill-governed, but his own: he now sees in
their wealth and progress a direct source of wealth and progress to his
own country. iIt is commerce which is rapidly rendering war obsolete, by
strengthening and multiplying the personal interests which are in
natural opposition to it. And jit may be said without exaggeration that
the great extent and rapid increase of international trade, in being the
principal guarantee of the peace of the world, is the great permanent
security for the uninterrupted progress of the ideas, the institutions,
and the character of the human race.

Edition: current; Page: [595]


CHAPTER XVIII: Of International Values

§ 1. [The values of imported commodities depend on the terms of
international interchange] The values of commodities produced at the
same place, or in places sufficiently adjacent for capital to move
freely between them—let us say, for simplicity, of commodities produced
in the same country—depend (temporary fluctuations apart) upon their
cost of production. But the value of a commodity brought from a distant
place, especially from a foreign country, does not depend on its cost of
production in the place from whence it comes. On what, then, does it
depend? The value of a thing in any place, depends on the cost of its
acquisition in that place; which in the case of an imported article,
means the cost of production of the thing which is exported to pay for
it.

Since all trade is in reality barter, money being a mere instrument for
exchanging things against one another, we will, for simplicity, begin by
supposing the international trade to be in form, what it always is in
reality, an actual trucking of one commodity against another. As far as
we have hitherto proceeded, we have found all the laws of interchange to
be essentially the same, whether money is used or not; money never
governing, but always obeying, those general laws.

If, then, England imports wine from Spain, giving for every pipe of wine
a bale of cloth, the exchange value of a pipe of wine in England will
not depend upon what the production of the wine may have cost in
aSpaina, but upon what the production of the cloth has cost in England.
Though the wine may have cost in bSpainb the equivalent of only ten
days’ labour, yet, if the cloth costs in England twenty days’ labour,
the wine, when brought to England, will exchange for the produce of
twenty days’ English labour, plus the cost of carriage; including the
usual profit on the importer’s capital, during the time it is locked up,
and withheld from other employment.

The value, then, in any country, of a foreign commodity, depends on the
quantity of home produce which must be given to the foreign country in
exchange for it. In other words, the values of foreign commodities
depend on the terms of international exchange. What, then, do these
depend Edition: current; Page: [596] upon? What is it, which, in the
case supposed, causes a pipe of wine from Spain to be exchanged with
England for exactly that quantity of cloth? We have seen that it is not
their cost of production. If the cloth and the wine were both made in
Spain, they would exchange at their cost of production in Spain; if they
were both made in England, they would exchange at their cost of
production in England: but all the cloth being made in England, and all
the wine in Spain, they are in circumstances to which we have already
determined that the law of cost of production is not applicable. We must
accordingly, as we have done before in a similar embarrassment, fall
back upon an antecedent law, that of supply and demand: and in this we
shall again find the solution of our difficulty.

I have cdiscussed this questionc in a separate Essay, already once
referred to;[*] and a dquotationd of part of the exposition then given,
will ebe the best introduction to my present view of the subjecte. I
must give notice that we are now in the region of the most complicated
questions which political economy affords; that the subject is one which
cannot possibly be made elementary; and that a more continuous effort of
attention than has yet been required, will be necessary to follow the
series of deductions. The thread, however, which we are about to take in
hand, is in itself very simple and manageable; the only difficulty is in
following it through the windings and entanglements of complex
international transactions.

§ 2. [The terms of international interchange depend on the Equation of
International Demand] “When the trade is established between the two
countries, the two commodities will exchange for each other at the same
rate of interchange in both countries—bating the cost of carriage, of
which, for the present, it will be more convenient to omit the
consideration. Supposing, therefore, for the sake of argument, that the
carriage of the commodities from one country to the other could be
effected without labour and without cost, no sooner would the trade be
opened than the value of the two commodities, estimated in each other,
would come to a level in both countries.

“Suppose that 10 yards of broadcloth cost in England as much labour as
15 yards of linen, and in Germany as much as 20.” In common with most of
my predecessors, I find it advisable, in these intricate investigations,
to give distinctness and fixity to the conception by numerical examples.
These examples must sometimes, as in the present case, be purely
supposititious. Edition: current; Page: [597] I should have apreferred
real ones; but all that is essential is, that the numbers should be such
as admit of being easily followed through the subsequent combinations
into which they enter.

This supposition then being made, it would be the interest of England to
import linen from Germany, and of Germany to import cloth from England.
“When each country produced both commodities for itself, 10 yards of
cloth exchanged for 15 yards of linen in England, and for 20 in Germany.
They will now exchange for the same number of yards of linen in both.
For what number? If for 15 yards, England will be just as she was, and
Germany will gain all. If for 20 yards, Germany will be as before, and
England will derive the whole of the benefit. If for any number
intermediate between 15 and 20, the advantage will be shared between the
two countries. If, for example, 10 yards of cloth exchange for 18 of
linen, England will gain an advantage of 3 yards on every 15, Germany
will save 2 out of every 20. The problem is, what are the causes which
determine the proportion in which the cloth of England and the linen of
Germany will exchange for each other.

“As exchange value, in this case as in every other, is proverbially
fluctuating, it does not matter what we suppose it to be when we begin:
we shall soon see whether there be any fixed point about which it
oscillates, which it has a tendency always to approach to, and to remain
at. Let us suppose, then, that by the effect of what Adam Smith calls
the higgling of the market, 10 yards of cloth in both countries,
exchange for 17 yards of linen.

“The demand for a commodity, that is, the quantity of it which can find
a purchaser, varies as we have before remarked, according to the price.
In Germany the price of 10 yards of cloth is now 17 yards of linen, or
whatever quantity of money is equivalent in Germany to 17 yards of
linen. Now, that being the price, there is some particular number of
yards of cloth, which will be in demand, or will find purchasers, at
that price. There is some given quantity of cloth, more than which could
not be disposed of at that price; less than which, at that price, would
not fully satisfy the demand. Let us suppose this quantity to be 1000
times 10 yards.

“Let us now turn our attention to England. There, the price of 17 yards
of linen is 10 yards of cloth, or whatever quantity of money is
equivalent in England to 10 yards of cloth. There is some particular
number of yards of linen which, at that price, will exactly satisfy the
demand, and no more. Let us suppose that this number is 1000 times 17
yards.

“As 17 yards of linen are to 10 yards of cloth, so are 1000 times 17
yards to 1000 times 10 yards. At the existing exchange value, the linen
which England requires will exactly pay for the quantity of cloth which,
Edition: current; Page: [598] on the same terms of interchange, Germany
requires. The demand on each side is precisely sufficient to carry off
the supply on the other. The conditions required by the principle of
demand and supply are fulfilled, and the two commodities will continue
to be interchanged, as we supposed them to be, in the ratio of 17 yards
of linen for 10 yards of cloth.

“But our suppositions might have been different. Suppose that, at the
assumed rate of interchange, England bhasb been disposed to consume no
greater quantity of linen than 800 times 17 yards: it is evident that,
at the rate supposed, this would not have sufficed to pay for the 1000
times 10 yards of cloth which we have supposed Germany to require at the
assumed value. Germany would be able to procure no more than 800 times
10 yards at that price. To procure the remaining 200, which she would
have no means of doing but by bidding higher for them, she would offer
more than 17 yards of linen in exchange for 10 yards of cloth: let us
suppose her to offer 18. At cthisc price, perhaps, England would be
inclined to purchase a greater quantity of linen. She would consume,
possibly, at that price, 900 times 18 yards. On the other hand, cloth
having risen in price, the demand of Germany for it would probably have
diminished. If, instead of 1000 times 10 yards, she is now contented
with 900 times 10 yards, these will exactly pay for the 900 times 18
yards of linen which England is willing to take at the altered price:
the demand on each side will again exactly suffice to take off the
corresponding supply; and 10 yards for 18 will be the rate at which, in
both countries, cloth will exchange for linen.

“The converse of all this would have happened, if, instead of 800 times
17 yards, we had supposed that England, at the rate of 10 for 17, would
have taken 1200 times 17 yards of linen. In this case, it is England
whose demand is not fully supplied; it is England who, by bidding for
more linen, will alter the rate of interchange to her own disadvantage;
and 10 yards of cloth will fall, in both countries, below the value of
17 yards of linen. By this fall of cloth, or what is the same thing,
this rise of linen, the demand of Germany for cloth will increase, and
the demand of England for linen will diminish, till the rate of
interchange has so adjusted itself that the cloth and the linen will
exactly pay for one another; and when once this point is attained,
values will remain without further alteration.

“It may be considered, therefore, as established, that when two
countries trade together in two commodities, the exchange value of these
commodities relatively to each other will adjust itself to the
inclinations and circumstances of the consumers on both sides, in such
manner that the quantities required by each country, of the articles
which it imports from its neighbour, Edition: current; Page: [599] shall
be exactly sufficient to pay for one another. As the inclinations and
circumstances of consumers cannot be reduced to any rule, so neither can
the proportions in which the two commodities will be interchanged. We
know that the limits within which the variation is confined, are the
ratio between their costs of production in the one country, and the
ratio between their costs of production in the other. Ten yards of cloth
cannot exchange for more than 20 yards of linen, nor for less than 15.
But they may exchange for any intermediate number. The ratios,
therefore, in which the advantage of the trade may be divided between
the two nations, are various. The circumstances on which the
proportionate share of each country more remotely depends, admit only of
a very general indication.

“It is even possible to conceive an extreme case, in which the whole of
the advantage resulting from the interchange would be reaped by one
party, the other country gaining nothing at all. There is no absurdity
in the hypothesis that, of some given commodity, a certain quantity is
all that is wanted at any price; and that, when that quantity is
obtained, no fall in the exchange value would induce other consumers to
come forward, or those who are already supplied, to take more. Let us
suppose that this is the case in Germany with cloth. Before her trade
with England commenced, when 10 yards of cloth cost her as much labour
as 20 yards of linen, she nevertheless consumed as much cloth as she
wanted under any circumstances, and, if she could obtain it at the rate
of 10 yards of cloth for 15 of linen, she would not consume more. Let
this fixed quantity be 1000 times 10 yards. At the rate, however, of 10
for 20, England would want more linen than would be equivalent to this
quantity of cloth. She would consequently, offer a higher value for
linen; or, what is the same thing, she would offer her cloth at a
cheaper rate. But, as by no lowering of the value could she prevail on
Germany to take a greater quantity of cloth, there would be no limit to
the rise of linen or fall of cloth, until the demand of England for
linen was reduced by the rise of its value, to the quantity which 1000
times 10 yards of cloth would purchase. It might be, that to produce
this diminution of the demand a less fall would not suffice than that
which would make 10 yards of cloth exchange for 15 of linen. Germany
would then gain the whole of the advantage, and England would be exactly
as she was before the trade commenced. It would be for the interest,
however, of Germany herself to keep her linen a little below the value
at which it could be produced in England, in order to keep herself from
being supplanted by the home producer. England, therefore, would always
benefit in some degree by the existence of the trade, though it might be
da very trifling one.”[*]

Edition: current; Page: [600]
In this statement, I conceive, is contained the efirst elementarye
principle of International Valuesf. I have, as is indispensable in such
abstract and hypothetical cases, supposed the circumstances to be much
less complex than they really are: in the first place, by suppressing
the cost of carriage; next, by supposing that there are only two
countries trading together; and lastly, that they trade only in two
commodities. To grender the exposition of the principle completeg, it is
necessary to restore the various circumstances thus temporarily left out
to simplify the argument. Those who are accustomed to any kind of
scientific investigation will probably see, without formal proof, that
the introduction of these circumstances cannot alter the theory of the
subject. Trade among any number of countries, and in any number of
commodities, must take place on the same essential principles as trade
between two countries and in two commodities. Introducing a greater
number of agents precisely similar, cannot change the law of their
action, no more than putting additional weights into the two scales of a
balance alters the law of gravitation. It alters nothing but the
numerical results. For more complete satisfaction, however, we will
enter into the complex cases with the same particularity with which we
have stated the simpler one.

§ 3. [Influence of cost of carriage on international values] First, let
us introduce the element of cost of carriage. The chief difference will
then be, that the cloth and the linen will no longer exchange for each
other at precisely the same rate in both countries. Linen, having to be
carried to England, will be dearer there by its cost of carriage; and
cloth will be dearer in Germany by the cost of carrying it from England.
Linen, estimated in cloth, will be dearer in England than in Germany, by
the cost of carriage of both articles: and so will cloth in Germany,
estimated in linen. Suppose that the cost of carriage of each is
equivalent to one yard of linen; and suppose that, if they could have
been carried without cost, the terms of interchange would have been 10
yards of cloth for 17 of linen. It amay seema at first that each country
will pay its own cost of carriage; that is, the carriage of the article
it imports; that in Germany 10 yards of cloth will exchange for 18 of
linen, namely, the original 17, and 1 to cover the cost of carriage of
the cloth; while in England, 10 yards of cloth will only purchase 16 of
linen, 1 yard being deducted for the cost of carriage of the linen.
This, however, cannot be affirmed with certainty; it will only be true,
if the linen which the English consumers would take at the price of 10
for 16, exactly pays for the cloth which the German consumers Edition:
current; Page: [601] would take at 10 for 18. The valuesb, whatever they
are, mustb establish this equilibrium. No absolute rule, therefore, can
be laid down for the division of the cost, no more than for the division
of the advantage: and it does not follow that in whatever ratio the one
is divided, the other will be divided in the same. It is impossible to
say, if the cost of carriage could be annihilated, whether the producing
or the importing country would be most benefited. cThisc would depend on
the play of international demand.

Cost of carriage has one effect more. But for it, every commodity would
d(if trade be supposed free)d be either regularly imported or regularly
exported. A country would make nothing for itself which it did not also
make for other countries. But in consequence of cost of carriage there
are many things, especially bulky articles, which every, or almost every
country produces within itself. After exporting the things in which it
can employ itself most advantageously, and importing those in which it
is under the greatest disadvantage, there are many lying between, of
which the relative cost of production in that and in other countries
differs so little, that the cost of carriage would absorb more than the
whole saving in cost of production which would be obtained by importing
one and exporting another. This is the case with numerous commodities of
common consumption; including the coarser qualities of many articles of
food and manufacture, of which the finer kinds are the subject of
extensive international traffic.

§ 4. [The law of values which holds between two countries and two
commodities, holds of any greater number] Let us now introduce a greater
number of commodities than the two we have hitherto supposed. Let cloth
and linen, however, be still the articles of which the comparative cost
of production in England and in Germany differs the most; so that if
they were confined to two commodities, these would be the two which it
would be most their interest to exchange. We will now again omit cost of
carriage, which, having been shown not to affect the essentials of the
question, does but embarrass unnecessarily the statement of it. Let us
suppose, then, that the demand of England for linen is either so much
greater than that of Germany for cloth, or so much more extensible by
cheapness, that if England had no commodity but cloth which Germany
would take, the demand of England would force up the terms of
interchange to 10 yards of cloth for only 16 of linen, so that England
would gain only the difference between 15 and 16, Germany the difference
between 16 and 20. But let us now suppose that England has also another
commodity, say iron, which is in demand in Germany, and that the
quantity of iron which is of equal Edition: current; Page: [602] value
in England with 10 yards of cloth, (let us call this quantity a
hundredweight) will, if produced in Germany, cost as much labour as 18
yards of linen, so that if offered by England for 17, it will undersell
the German producer. In these circumstances, linen will not be forced up
to the rate of 16 yards for 10 of cloth, but will stopa, supposea at 17;
for although, at that rate of interchange, Germany will not take enough
cloth to pay for all the linen required by England, she will take iron
for the remainder, and it is the same thing to England whether she gives
a hundredweight of iron or 10 yards of cloth, both being made at the
same cost. If we now superadd coals or cottons on the side of England,
and wine, or corn, or timber, on the side of Germany, it will make no
difference in the principle. The exports of each country must exactly
pay for the imports; meaning now the aggregate exports and imports, not
those of particular commodities taken singly. The produce of fifty days’
English labour, whether in cloth, coals, iron, or any other exports,
will exchange for the produce of forty, or fifty, or sixty days’ German
labour, in linen, wine, corn, or timber, according to the international
demand. There is some proportion at which the demand of the two
countries for each other’s products will exactly correspond: so that the
things supplied by England to Germany will be completely paid for, and
no more, by those supplied by Germany to England. This accordingly will
be the ratio in which the produce of English and the produce of German
labour will exchange for one another.

If, therefore, it be asked what country draws to itself the greatest
share of the advantage of any trade it carries on, the answer is, the
country for whose productions there is in other countries the greatest
demand, and a demand the most susceptible of increase from additional
cheapness. In so far as the productions of any country possess this
property, the country obtains all foreign commodities at less cost. It
gets its imports cheaper, the greater the intensity of the demand in
foreign countries for its exports. It also gets its imports cheaper, the
less the extent and intensity of its own demand for them. The market is
cheapest to those whose demand is small. A country which desires few
foreign productions, and only a limited quantity of them, while its own
commodities are in great request in foreign countries, will obtain its
limited imports at extremely small cost, that is, in exchange for the
produce of a very small quantity of its labour and capital.

Lastly, having introduced more than the original two commodities into
the hypothesis, let us also introduce more than the original two
countries. After the demand of England for the linen of Germany has
raised the rate of interchange to 10 yards of cloth for 16 of linen,
suppose a trade Edition: current; Page: [603] opened between England and
some other country which also exports linen. And let us suppose that if
England had no trade but with this third country, the play of
international demand would enable her to obtain from it, for 10 yards of
cloth or its equivalent, 17 yards of linen. She evidently would not go
on buying linen from Germany at the former rate: Germany would be
undersold, and must consent to give 17 yards, like the other country. In
this case, the circumstances of production and of demand in the third
country are supposed to be in themselves more advantageous to England
than the circumstances of Germany; but this supposition is not
necessary: we might suppose that if the trade with Germany did not
exist, England would be obliged to give to the other country the same
advantageous terms which she gives to Germany; 10 yards of cloth for 16,
or even less than 16, of linen. Even so, the opening of the third
country makes a great difference in favour of England. There is now a
double market for English exports, while the demand of England for linen
is only what it was before. This necessarily obtains for England more
advantageous terms of interchange. The two countries, requiring much
more of her produce than was required by either alone, must, in order to
obtain it, force an increased demand for their exports, by offering them
at a lower value.

It deserves notice, that this effect in favour of England from the
opening of another market for her exports, will equally be produced even
though the country from which the demand comes should have nothing to
sell which England is willing to take. Suppose that the third country,
though brequiringb cloth or iron from England, produces no linen, nor
any other article which is in demand there. She however produces
exportable articles, or she would have no means of paying for imports:
her exports, though not suitable to the English consumer, can find a
market somewhere. As we are only supposing three countries, we must
assume her to find this market in Germany, and to pay for what she
imports from England by orders on her German customers. Germany,
therefore, besides having to pay for her own imports, now owes a debt to
England on account of the third country, and the means for both purposes
must be derived from her exportable produce. She must therefore tender
that produce to England on terms sufficiently favourable to force a
demand equivalent to this double debt. Everything will take place
precisely as if the third country had bought German produce with her own
goods, and offered that produce to England in exchange for hers. There
is an increased demand for English goods, for which German goods have to
furnish the payment; and this can only be done by forcing an increased
demand for them in England, that is, by lowering their value. Thus an
increase of demand for a country’s Edition: current; Page: [604] exports
in any foreign country, enables her to obtain more cheaply even those
imports which she procures from other quarters. And conversely, an
increase of her own demand for any foreign commodity compels her,
cæteris paribus, to pay dearer for all foreign commodities.

cThe law which we have now illustrated, may be appropriately named, the
Equation of International Demand. It may be concisely stated as follows.
The produce of a country exchanges for the produce of other countries,
at such values as are required in order that the whole of her exports
may exactly pay for the whole of her imports. This law of International
Values is but an extension of the more general law of Value, which we
called the Equation of Supply and Demand.* We have seen that the value
of a commodity always so adjusts itself as to bring the demand to the
exact level of the supply. But all trade, either between nations or
individuals, is an interchange of commodities, in which the things that
they respectively have to sell, constitute also their means of purchase:
the supply brought by the one constitutes his demand for what is brought
by the other. So that supply and demand are but another expression for
reciprocal demand: and to say that value will adjust itself so as to
equalize demand with supply, is in fact to say that it will adjust
itself so as to equalize the demand on one side with the demand on the
other.

a§ 5.a [Effect of improvements in production on international values] To
trace the consequences of bthisb law of International Values through
their wide ramifications, would occupy more space than can be cherec
devoted to such a purposed. But there is one of its applications which I
will notice, as being in itself not unimportant,d as bearing on the
question which will occupy us in the next chapter, eande especially as
conducing to the more full and clear understanding of the law itself.

We have seen that the value at which a country purchases a foreign
commodity, does not conform to the cost of production in the country
Edition: current; Page: [605] from which the commodity comes. Suppose
now a change in that cost of production; an improvement, for example, in
the process of manufacture. Will the benefit of the improvement be fully
participated in by other countries? Will the commodity be sold as much
cheaper to foreigners, as it is produced cheaper at home? This question,
and the considerations which must be entered into in order to resolve
it, are well adapted to try the worth of the theory.

Let us first suppose, that the improvement is of a nature to create a
new branch of export: to make foreigners resort to the country for a
commodity which they had previously produced at home. On this
supposition, the foreign demand for the productions of the country is
increased; which necessarily alters the international values to its
advantage, and to the disadvantage of foreign countries, who, therefore,
though they participate in the benefit of the new product, must purchase
that benefit by paying for all the other productions of the country at a
dearer rate than before. How much dearer, will depend on the degree
necessary for re-establishing, under these new conditions, the Equation
of International Demand. These consequences follow in a very obvious
manner from the law of international values, and I shall not occupy
space in illustrating them, but shall pass to the more frequent case, of
an improvement which does not create a new article of export, but lowers
the cost of production of something which the country already exported.

It being advantageous, in discussions of this complicated nature, to
employ definite numerical amounts, we shall return to our original
example. Ten yards of cloth, if produced in Germany, would require the
same amount of labour and capital as twenty yards of linen; but by the
play of international demand, they can be obtained from England for
seventeen. Suppose now, that by a mechanical improvement made in
Germany, and not capable of being transferred to England, the same
quantity of labour and capital which produced twenty yards of linen, is
enabled to produce thirty. Linen falls one-third in value in the German
market, as compared with other commodities produced in Germany. Will it
also fall one-third as compared with English cloth, thus giving to
England, in common with Germany, the full benefit of the improvement? Or
(ought we not rather to say), since the cost to England of fobtainingf
linen was not regulated by the cost to Germany of gproducingg it, and
since England, accordingly, did not get the entire benefit even of the
twenty yards which Germany hcouldh have given for ten yards of cloth,
but only obtained seventeen—why should she now obtain more, merely
because this theoretical limit is removed ten degrees further off?

Edition: current; Page: [606]
It is evident that in the outset, the improvement will lower the value
of linen in Germany, in relation to all other commodities in the German
market, including, among the rest, even the imported commodity, cloth.
If 10 yards of cloth previously exchanged for 17 yards of linen, they
will now exchange for half as much more, or 25½ yards. But whether they
will continue to do so, will idepend on the effect which this increased
cheapness of linen produces on the international demand. The demand for
linen in England could scarcely fail to be increased. But it might be
increased either in proportion to the cheapness, or in a greater
proportion than the cheapness, or in a less proportion.

If the demand was increased in the same proportion with the cheapness,
England would take as many times 25½ yards of linen, as the number of
times 17 yards which she took previously. She would expend in linen
exactly as much of cloth, or of the equivalents of cloth, as much in
short of the collective income of her people, as she did before. Germany
on her part, would probably require, at that rate of interchange, the
same quantity of cloth as before, because it would in reality cost her
exactly as much; 25½ yards of linen being now of the same value in her
market, as 17 yards were before. In this case, therefore, 10 yards of
cloth for 25½ of linen is the rate of interchange which under these new
conditions would restore the equation of international demand; and
England would obtain linen one-third cheaper than before, being the same
advantage as was obtained by Germany.

It might happen, however, that this great cheapening of linen would
increase the demand for it in England in a greater ratio than the
increase of cheapness; and that if she before wanted 1000 times 17
yards, she would now require more than 1000 times 25½ yards to satisfy
her demand. If so, the equation of international demand cannot establish
itself at that rate of interchange; to pay for the linen England must
offer cloth on more advantageous terms; say, for example, 10 yards for
21 of linen; so that England will not have the full benefit of the
improvement in the production of linen, while Germany, in addition to
that benefit, will also pay less for cloth. But again, it is possible
that England might not desire to increase her consumption of linen in
even so great a proportion as that of the increased cheapness; she might
not desire so great a quantity as 1000 times 25½ yards: and in that case
Germany must force a demand, by offering more than 25½ yards of linen
for 10 of cloth: linen will be cheapened in England in a still greater
degree than in Germany; while Germany will obtain cloth on more
unfavourable terms; and at a higher exchange value than before.

Edition: current; Page: [607]
After what has already been said, it is not necessary to particularize
the manner in which these results might be modified by introducing into
the hypothesis other countries and other commodities. There is a further
circumstance by which they may also be modified. In the case supposed
the consumers of Germany have had a part of their incomes set at liberty
by the increased cheapness of linen, which they may indeed expend in
increasing their consumption of that article, but which they may
likewise expend in other articles, and among others, in cloth or other
imported commodities. This would be an additional element in the
international demand, and would modify more or less the terms of
interchange.

Of the three possible varieties in the influence of cheapness on demand,
which is the more jprobable—thatj the demand would be increased more
than the cheapness, as much as the cheapness, or less than the
cheapness? This depends on the nature of the particular commodity, and
on the tastes of purchasers. When the commodity is one in general
request, and the fall of its price brings it within kreach of a much
larger class of incomes than before, the demand is often increased in a
greater ratio than the fall of price, and a larger sum of money is on
the whole expended in the article. Such was the case with coffee, when
its price was lowered by successive reductions of taxation; and such
would probably be the case with sugar, wine, and a large class of
commodities which, though not necessaries, are largely consumed, and in
which many consumers indulge when the articles are cheap and economize
when they are dear. But it more frequently happens that when a commodity
falls in price, less money is spent in it than before: a greater
quantity is consumed, but not so great a value. The consumer who saves
money by the cheapness of the article, will be likely to expend part of
lthel saving in increasing his consumption of other things: and unless
the low price attracts a large class of new purchasers who were either
not consumers of the article at all, or only in small quantity and
occasionally, a less aggregate sum will be expended on it. Speaking
generally, therefore, the third of our three cases is the most probable:
and an improvement in an exportable article is likely to be as
beneficial m(if not more beneficial)m to foreign countries, nasn to the
country where the article is produced.

a§ 6. [The preceding theory not complete] Thus far had the theory of
international values been carried in the first and second editions of
this Edition: current; Page: [608] work. But intelligent criticisms
b(chiefly those of my friend Mr. William Thornton)b, and subsequent
further investigation, have shown that the doctrine stated in the
preceding pages, though correct as far as it goes, is not yet the
complete theory of the subject matter.

It has been shown that the exports and imports between the two countries
(or, if we suppose more than two, between each country and the world)
must in the aggregate pay for each other, and must therefore be
exchanged for one another at such values as will be compatible with the
equation of international demand. That this, however, does not furnish
the complete law of the phenomenon, appears from the following
consideration: that several different rates of international value may
all equally fulfil the conditions of this law.

The supposition was, that England could produce 10 yards of cloth with
the same labour as 15 of linen, and Germany with the same labour as 20
of linen; that a trade was opened between the two countries; that
England thenceforth confined her production to cloth, and Germany to
linen; and, that if 10 yards of cloth should thenceforth exchange for 17
of linen, England and Germany would exactly supply each other’s demand:
that, for instance, if England wanted at that price 17,000 yards of
linen, Germany would want exactly the 10,000 yards of cloth, which, at
that price, England would be required to give for the linen. Under these
suppositions it appeared, that 10 cloth for 17 linen, would be, in point
of fact, the international values.

But it is quite possible that some other rate, such as 10 cloth for 18
linen, might also fulfil the conditions of the equation of international
demand. Suppose that at this last rate, England would want more linen
than at the rate of 10 for 17, but not in the ratio of the cheapness;
that she would not want the 18,000 which she could now buy with 10,000
yards of cloth, but would be content with 17,500, for which she would
pay (at the new rate of 10 for 18) 9722 yards of cloth. Germany, again,
having to pay dearer for cloth than when it could be bought at 10 for
17, would probably reduce her consumption to an amount below 10,000
yards, perhaps to the very same number, 9722. Under these conditions the
Equation of International Demand would still exist. Thus, the rate of 10
for 17, and that of 10 for 18, would equally satisfy the Equation of
Demand: and many other rates of interchange might satisfy it in like
manner. It is conceivable that the conditions might be equally satisfied
by every numerical rate which could be supposed. There is still
therefore a portion of indeterminateness in the rate at which the
international values Edition: current; Page: [609] would adjust
themselves; showing that the whole of the influencing circumstances
cannot yet have been taken into caccount.

§ 7. [International values depend not solely on the quantities demanded,
but also on the means of production available in each country for the
supply of foreign markets] It will be found that to supply this
deficiency, we must take into consideration not only, as we have already
done, the quantities demanded in each country, of the imported
commodities; but also the extent of the means of supplying that demand,
which are set at liberty in each country by the change in the direction
of its industry.

To illustrate this point it will be necessary to choose more convenient
numbers than those which we have hitherto employed. Let it be supposed
that in England 100 yards of cloth, previously to the trade, exchanged
for 100 of linen, but that in Germany 100 of cloth exchanged for 200 of
linen. When the trade was opened, England would supply cloth to Germany,
Germany linen to England, at an exchange value which would depend partly
on the element already discussed, viz. the comparative degree in which,
in the two countries, increased cheapness operates in increasing the
demand; and partly on some other element not yet taken into account. In
order to isolate this unknown element, it will be necessary to make some
definite and invariable supposition in regard to the known element. Let
us therefore assume, that the influence of cheapness on demand conforms
to some simple law, common to both countries and to both commodities. As
the simplest and most convenient, let us suppose that in both countries
any given increase of cheapness produces an exactly proportional
increase of consumption: or, in other words, that the value expended in
the commodity, the cost incurred for the sake of obtaining it, is always
the same, whether that cost affords a greater or a smaller quantity of
the commodity.

Let us now suppose that England, previously to the trade, required a
million of yards of linen, which were worth at the English cost of
production, a million yards of cloth. By turning all the labour and
capital with which that linen was produced, to the production of cloth,
she would produce for exportation a million yards of cloth. Suppose that
this is the exact quantity which Germany is accustomed to consume.
England can dispose of all this cloth in Germany at the German price;
she must consent indeed to take a little less until she has driven the
German producer from the market, but as soon as this is effected, she
can sell her million of cloth for two millions of linen; being the
quantity that the German clothiers are enabled to make, by transferring
their whole labour and capital from Edition: current; Page: [610] cloth
to linen. Thus England would gain the whole benefit of the trade, and
Germany nothing. This would be perfectly consistent with the equation of
international demand: since England (according to the hypothesis in the
preceding paragraph) now requires two millions of linen (being able to
get them at the same cost at which she previously obtained only one),
while the prices in Germany not being altered, Germany requires as
before exactly a million of cloth, and can obtain it by employing the
labour and capital set at liberty from the production of cloth, in
producing the two millions of linen required by England.

Thus far we have supposed that the additional cloth which England could
make, by transferring to cloth the whole of the capital previously
employed in making linen, was exactly sufficient to supply the whole of
Germany’s existing demand. But suppose next that it is more than
sufficient. Suppose that while England could make with her liberated
capital a million yards of cloth for exportation, the cloth which
Germany had heretofore required was 800,000 yards only, equivalent at
the German cost of production to 1,600,000 yards of linen. England
therefore could not dispose of a whole million of cloth in Germany at
the German prices. Yet she wants, whether cheap or dear (by our
supposition), as much linen as can be bought for a million of cloth: and
since this can only be obtained from Germany, or by the more expensive
process of production at home, the holders of the million of cloth will
be forced by each other’s competition to offer it to Germany on any
terms (short of the English cost of production) which will induce
Germany to take the whole. What terms these would be, the supposition we
have made enables us exactly to define. The 800,000 yards of cloth which
Germany consumed, cost her the equivalent of 1,600,000 linen, and that
invariable cost is what she is willing to expend in cloth, whether the
quantity it obtains for her be more or less. England therefore, to
induce Germany to take a million of cloth, must offer it for 1,600,000
of linen. The international values will thus be 100 cloth for 160 linen,
intermediate between the ratio of the costs of production in England and
that of the costs of production in Germany: and the two countries will
divide the benefit of the trade, England gaining in the aggregate
600,000 yards of linen, and Germany being richer by 200,000 additional
yards of cloth.

Let us now stretch the last supposition still farther, and suppose that
the cloth previously consumed by Germany was not only less than the
million yards which England is enabled to furnish by discontinuing her
production of linen, but less in the full proportion of England’s
advantage in the production, that is, that Germany only required half a
million. In this case, by ceasing altogether to produce cloth, Germany
can add a million, but a million only, to her production of linen, and
this million, Edition: current; Page: [611] being the equivalent of what
the half million previously cost her, is all that she can be induced by
any degree of cheapness to expend in cloth. England will be forced by
her own competition to give a whole million of cloth for this million of
linen, just as she was forced in the preceding case to give it for
1,600,000. But England could have produced at the same cost a million
yards of linen for herself. England therefore derives, in this case, no
advantage from the international trade. Germany gains the whole;
obtaining a million of cloth instead of half a million, at what the half
million previously cost her. Germany, in short, is in this third case,
exactly in the same situation as England was in the first case; which
may easily be verified by reversing the figures.

As the general result of the three cases, it may be laid down as a
theorem, that under the supposition we have made of a demand exactly in
proportion to the cheapness, the law of international value will be as
follows:—

The whole of the cloth which England can make with the capital
previously devoted to linen, will exchange for the whole of the linen
which Germany can make with the capital previously devoted to cloth.

Or, still more generally,

The whole of the commodities which the two countries can respectively
make for exportation, with the labour and capital thrown out of
employment by importation, will exchange against one another.

This law, and the three different possibilities arising from it in
respect to the division of the advantage, may be conveniently
generalized by means of algebraical symbols, as follows:—

Let the quantity of cloth which England can make with the labour and
capital withdrawn from the production of linen, be = n.

Let the cloth previously required by Germany (at the German cost of
production) be = m.

Then n of cloth will always exchange for exactly 2m of linen.

Consequently if n = m, the whole advantage will be on the side of
England.

If n = 2m, the whole advantage will be on the side of Germany.

If n be greater than m, but less than 2m, the two countries will share
the advantage; England getting 2m of linen where she before got only n;
Germany getting n of cloth where she before got only m.

It is almost superfluous to observe that the figure 2 stands where it
does, only because it is the figure which expresses the advantage of
Germany over England in linen as estimated in cloth, and (what is the
same thing) of England over Germany in cloth as estimated in linen. If
we had supposed that in Germany, before the trade, 100 of cloth
exchanged for 1000 instead of 200 of linen, then n (after the trade
commenced) would have Edition: current; Page: [612] exchanged for 10m
instead of 2m. If instead of 1000 or 200 we had supposed only 150, n
would have exchanged for only 3/2 m. If (in fine) the cost value of
cloth (as estimated in linen) in Germany, exceeds the cost value
similarly estimated in England, in the ratio of p to q, then will n,
after the opening of the trade, exchange for p/q m.*

§ 8. [The practical result is little affected by this additional
element] We have now arrived at what seems a law of International
Values, of great simplicity and generality. But we have done so by
setting out from a purely arbitrary hypothesis respecting the relation
between demand and cheapness. We have assumed their relation to be
fixed, though it is essentially variable. We have supposed that every
increase of cheapness produces an exactly proportional extension of
demand; in other words, that the same invariable Edition: current; Page:
[613] value is laid out in a commodity whether it be cheap or dear; and
the law which we have investigated holds good only on this hypothesis,
or some other practically equivalent to it. Let us now, therefore,
combine the two variable elements of the question, the variations of
each of which we have considered separately. Let us suppose the relation
between demand and cheapness to vary, and to become such as would
prevent the rule of interchange laid down in the last theorem from
satisfying the conditions of the Equation of International Demand. Let
it be supposed, for instance, that the demand of England for linen is
exactly proportional to the cheapness, but that of Germany for cloth,
not proportional. To revert to the second of our three cases, the case
in which England by discontinuing the production of linen could produce
for exportation a million yards of cloth, and Germany by ceasing to
produce cloth could produce an additional 1,600,000 yards of linen. If
the one of these quantities exactly exchanged for the other, the demand
of England would on our present supposition be exactly satisfied, for
she requires all the linen which can be got for a million yards of
cloth: but Germany perhaps, though she required 800,000 cloth at a cost
equivalent to 1,600,000 linen, yet when she can get a million of cloth
at the same cost, may not require the whole million; or may require more
than a million. First, let her not require so much; but only as much as
she can now buy for 1,500,000 linen. England will still offer a million
for these 1,500,000; but even this may not induce Germany to take so
much as a million; and if England continues to expend exactly the same
aggregate cost on linen whatever be the price, she will have to submit
to take for her million of cloth any quantity of linen (not less than a
million) which may be requisite to induce Germany to take a million of
cloth. Suppose this to be 1,400,000 yards. England has now reaped from
the trade a gain not of 600,000 but only of 400,000 yards; while
Germany, besides having obtained an extra 200,000 yards of cloth, has
obtained it with only seven-eighths of the labour and capital which she
previously expended in supplying herself with cloth, and may expend the
remainder in increasing her own consumption of linen, or of any other
commodity.

Suppose on the contrary that Germany, at the rate of a million cloth for
1,600,000 linen, requires more than a million yards of cloth. England
having only a million which she can give without atrenchinga upon the
quantity she previously reserved for herself, Germany must bid for the
extra cloth at a higher rate than 160 for 100, until she reaches a rate
(say 170 for 100) which will either bring down her own demand for cloth
to the limit of a million, or else tempt England to part with some of
the cloth she previously consumed at home.

Edition: current; Page: [614]
Let us next suppose that the proportionality of demand to cheapness,
instead of holding good in one country but not in the other, does not
hold good in either country, and that the deviation is of the same kind
in both; that, for instance, neither of the two increases its demand in
a degree equivalent to the increase of cheapness. On this supposition,
at the rate of one million cloth for 1,600,000 linen, England will not
want so much as 1,600,000 linen, nor Germany so much as a million cloth:
and if they fall short of that amount in exactly the same degree: if
England only wants linen to the amount of nine-tenths of 1,600,000
(1,440,000), and Germany only nine hundred thousand of cloth, the
interchange will continue to take place at the same rate. And so if
England wants a tenth more than 1,600,000, and Germany a tenth more than
a million. This coincidence (which, it is to be observed, supposes
demand to extend cheapness in a corresponding, but not in an equal
degree*) evidently could not exist unless by mere accident: and in any
other case, the equation of international demand would require a
different adjustment of international values.

The only general law, then, which can be laid down, is this. The values
at which a country exchanges its produce with foreign countries depend
on two things: first, on the amount and extensibility of their demand
for its commodities, compared with its demand for theirs; and secondly,
on the capital which it has to spare, from the production of domestic
commodities for its own consumption. The more the foreign demand for its
commodities exceeds its demand for foreign commodities, and the less
capital it can spare to produce for foreign markets, compared with what
foreigners spare to produce for its markets, the more favourable to it
will be the terms of interchange: that is, the more it will obtain of
foreign commodities in return for a given quantity of its own.

But these two influencing circumstances are in reality reducible to one:
for the capital which a country has to spare from the production of
domestic commodities for its own use, is in proportion to its own demand
for foreign commodities: whatever proportion of its collective income it
expends in purchases from abroad, that same proportion of its capital is
left without a home market for its productions. The new element,
therefore, which for the sake of scientific correctness we have
introduced into the theory of international values, does not seem to
make any very material Edition: current; Page: [615] difference in the
practical result. It still appearsb, that the countries which carry on
their foreign trade on the most advantageous terms, are those whose
commodities are most in demand by foreign countries, and which have
themselves the least demand for foreign commodities. From which, among
other consequences, it follows, that the richest countries, cæteris
paribus, gain the least by a given amount of foreign commerce: since,
having a greater demand for commodities generally, they are likely to
have a greater demand for foreign commodities, and thus modify the terms
of interchange to their own disadvantage. Their aggregate gains by
foreign trade, doubtless, are generally greater than those of poorer
countries, since they carry on a greater amount of such trade, and gain
the benefit of cheapness on a larger consumption: but their gain is less
on each individual article consumed.a

a§ 9.a [On what circumstances the cost to a country of its imports
depends] We now pass to another essential part of the theory of the
subject. There are two senses in which a country obtains commodities
cheaper by foreign trade; in the sense of Value, and in the sense of
Cost. It gets them cheaper in the first sense, by their falling in value
relatively to other things: the same quantity of them exchanging, in the
country, for a smaller quantity than before of the other produce of the
country. bTo revert to our original figures; in England, all consumers
of linen obtained, after the trade was opened,b 17 or some greater
number of yards for the same quantity of all other things for which they
before obtained only 15. The degree of cheapness, in this sense of the
term, depends on the claws of International Demand, so copiously
illustrated in the preceding sectionsc. But in the other sense, that of
Cost, a country gets a commodity cheaper when it obtains a greater
quantity of the commodity with the same expenditure of labour and
capital. In this sense of the term, cheapness in a great measure depends
upon a cause of a different nature: a country gets its imports cheaper,
in proportion to the general productiveness of its domestic industry; to
the general efficiency of its labour. The labour of one country may be,
as a whole, much more efficient than that of another: all or most of the
commodities capable of being produced in both, may be produced in one at
less absolute cost than in the other; which, as we have seen, will not
necessarily prevent the two countries from exchanging commodities. The
things which the more favoured country will import Edition: current;
Page: [616] from others, are of course those in which it is least
superior; but by importing them it acquires, even in those commodities,
the same advantage which it possesses in the articles it gives in
exchange for them. Thus the countries which obtain their own productions
at least cost, also get their imports at least cost.

This dwill be made estille more obvious if we suppose two competing
countries. England sends cloth to Germany, and gives 10 yards of it for
17 yards of linen, or for something else which in Germany is the
equivalent of those 17 yards. Another country, as for example France,
does the same. The one giving 10 yards of cloth for a certain quantity
of German commodities, so must the other: if, therefore, in England,
these 10 yards are produced by only half as much labour as that by which
they are produced in France, the linen or other commodities of Germany
will cost to England only half the amount of labour which they will cost
to France. England would thus obtain her imports at less cost than
France, in the ratio of the greater efficiency of her labour in the
production of cloth: which might be takenf, in the case supposed,f as an
gapproximateg estimate of the efficiency of her labour generally; since
France, as well as England, by selecting cloth as her article of export,
would have shown that hwith her also it was the commodity in whichh
labour was relatively the most efficient. It follows, therefore, that
every country gets its imports at less cost, in proportion to the
general efficiency of its labour.

This proposition was first clearly seen and expounded by Mr. Senior,*
but only as applicable to the importation of the precious metals. I
think it important to point out that the proposition holds equally true
of all other imported commodities; and further, that it is only a
portion of the truth. For, in the case supposed, the cost to England of
the linen which she pays for with ten yards of cloth, does not depend
solely upon the cost to herself of ten yards of cloth, but partly also
upon how many yards of linen she obtains in exchange for them. What her
imports cost to her is a function of two variables; the quantity of her
own commodities which she gives for them, and the cost of those
commodities. Of these, the last ialonei depends on the efficiency of her
labour: the first depends on the law of international values; that is,
on the intensity and extensibility of the foreign demand for her
commodities, compared with her demand for foreign commodities.

Edition: current; Page: [617]
In the case just now supposed, of a competition between England and
France, the state of international values affected both competitors
alike, since they were supposed to trade with the same country, and to
export and import the same commodities. The difference, therefore, in
what their imports cost them, depended solely on the other cause, the
unequal efficiency of their labour. They gave the same quantities; the
difference could only be in the cost of production. But if England
traded to Germany with cloth, and France with iron, the comparative
demand in Germany for those two commodities would bear a share in
determining the comparative cost, in labour and capital, with which
England and France would obtain German products. If iron were more in
demand in Germany than cloth, France would recover, through that
channel, part of her disadvantage; if less, her disadvantage would be
increased. The efficiency, therefore, of a country’s labour, is not the
only thing which determines even the cost at which that country obtains
imported commodities—while it has no share whatever in determining
either their exchange value, or, as we shall presently see, their price.

Edition: current; Page: [618]


CHAPTER XIX: Of Money, Considered as an Imported Commodity

§ 1. [Money imported in two modes; as a commodity, and as a medium of
exchange] The degree of progress which we have now made in the theory of
Foreign Trade, puts it in our power to supply what was previously
deficient in our view of the theory of Money; and this, when completed,
will in its turn enable us to conclude the subject of Foreign Trade.

Money, or the material of which it is composed, is, in Great Britain,
and in most other countries, a foreign commodity. Its value and
distribution must therefore be regulated, not by the law of value which
obtains in adjacent places, but by that which is applicable to imported
commodities—the law of International Values.

In the discussion into which we are now about to enter, I shall use the
terms Money and the Precious Metals indiscriminately. This may be done
without leading to any error; it having been shown that the value of
money, when it consists of the precious metals, or aof a paper currency
convertible into them on demand, is entirely governed by the value of
the metals themselves: from which it never bpermanentlyb differs, except
by the expense of coinage when this is paid by the individual and not by
the state.

Money is brought into a country in two different ways. It is imported
(chiefly in the form of bullion) like any other merchandize, as being an
advantageous article of commerce. It is also imported in its other
character of a medium of exchange, to pay some debt due to the country,
either for goods exported or on any other account. There are other ways
in which it may be introduced casually; these are the two in which it is
received in the ordinary course of business, and which determine its
value. The existence of these two distinct modes in which money flows
into a country, while other commodities are habitually introduced only
in the first of these modes, occasions somewhat more of complexity and
obscurity than exists Edition: current; Page: [619] in the case of other
commodities, and for this reason only is any special and minute
exposition necessary.

§ 2. [As a commodity, it obeys the same laws of value as other imported
commodities] In so far as the precious metals are imported in the
ordinary way of commerce, their value must depend on the same causes,
and conform to the same laws, as the value of any other foreign
production. It is in this mode chiefly that gold and silver diffuse
themselves from the mining countries into all other parts of the
commercial world. They are the staple commodities of those countries, or
at least are among their great articles of regular export; and are
shipped on speculation, in the same manner as other exportable
commodities. The quantity, therefore, which a country (say England) will
give of its own produce, for a certain quantity of bullion, will depend,
if we suppose only two countries and two commodities, upon the demand in
England for bullion, compared with the demand in the mining country
(which we will call Brazil) for what England has to give. They must
exchange in such proportions as will leave no unsatisfied demand on
either side, to alter values by its competition. The bullion required by
England must exactly pay for the cottons or other English commodities
required by Brazil. If, however, we substitute for this simplicity the
degree of complication which really exists, the equation of
international demand must be established not between the bullion wanted
in England and the cottons or broadcloth wanted in Brazil, but between
the whole of the imports of England and the whole of her exports. The
demand in foreign countries for English products, must be brought into
equilibrium with the demand in England for the products of foreign
countries; and all foreign commodities, bullion among the rest, must be
exchanged against English products in such proportions, as will, by the
effect they produce on the demand, establish this equilibrium.

There is nothing in the peculiar nature or uses of the precious metals,
which should make them an exception to the general principles of demand.
So far as they are wanted for purposes of luxury or the arts, the demand
increases with the cheapness, in the same irregular way as the demand
for any other commodity. So far as they are required for money, the
demand increases with the cheapness in a perfectly regular way, the
quantity needed being always in inverse proportion to the value. This is
the only real difference, in respect to demand, between money and other
things; and for the present purpose it is a difference altogether
immaterial.

Money, then, if imported solely as a merchandize, will, like other
imported commodities, be of lowest value in the countries for whose
exports there is the greatest foreign demand, and which have themselves
the least Edition: current; Page: [620] demand for foreign commodities.
To these two circumstances it is however necessary to add two others,
which produce their effect through cost of carriage. The cost of
obtaining bullion is compounded of two elements; the goods given to
purchase it, and the expense of transport: of which last, the bullion
countries will bear a part, (though an uncertain part,) in the
adjustment of international values. The expense of transport is partly
that of carrying the goods to the bullion countries, and partly that of
bringing back the bullion; both these items are influenced by the
distance from the mines; and the former is also much affected by the
bulkiness of the goods. Countries whose exportable produce consists of
the finer manufactures, obtain bullion, as well as all other foreign
articles, cæteris paribus, at less expense than countries which export
nothing but bulky raw produce.

To be quite accurate, therefore, we must say—The countries whose
exportable productions are most in demand abroad, and contain greatest
value in smallest bulk, which are nearest to the mines, and which have
least demand for foreign productions, are those in which money will be
of lowest value, or in other words, in which prices will habitually
range the highest. If we are speaking not of the value of money, but of
its cost, (that is, the quantity of the country’s labour which must be
expended to obtain it,) we must add to these four conditions of
cheapness a fifth condition, namely, “whose productive industry is the
most efficient.” This alasta, however, does not at all affect the value
of money, estimated in commodities: it affects the general abundance and
facility with which all things, money and commodities together, can be
obtained.

Although, therefore, Mr. Senior is right in pointing out the great
efficiency of English labour as the chief cause why the precious metals
are obtained at less cost by England than by most other countries, I
cannot admit that it at all accounts for their being of less value; for
their going less far in the purchase of commodities. This, in so far as
it is a fact, and not an illusion, must be occasioned by the great
demand in foreign countries for the staple commodities of England, and
the generally unbulky character of those commodities, compared with the
corn, wine, timber, sugar, wool, hides, tallow, hemp, flax, tobacco, raw
cotton, &c., which form the exports of other commercial countries. These
two causes will account for a somewhat higher range of general prices in
England than elsewhere, notwithstanding the counteracting influence of
her own great demand for foreign commodities. I am, however, strongly of
opinion that the high prices of commodities, and low purchasing power of
money in England, are more apparent than real. Food, indeed, is somewhat
dearer; and food composes so large a portion of the expenditure when the
income is small and the family large, that to such families England is a
dear country. Services, also, of most Edition: current; Page: [621]
descriptions, are dearer than bin the other countries of Europe, from
the less costly mode of living of the poorer classes on the Continent.
But manufactured commodities (except most of those in which good taste
is required)b are decidedly cheaper; or would be so, if buyers would be
content with the same quality of material and of workmanship. What is
called the dearness of living in England, is mainly an affair not of
necessity but of foolish custom; it being thought imperative by all
classes in England above the condition of a day-labourer, that the
things they consume should either be of the same quality with those used
by much richer people, or at least should be as nearly as possible
undistinguishable from them in outward appearance.

§ 3. [Its value does not depend exclusively on its cost of production at
the mines] From the preceding considerations, it appears that those are
greatly in error who contend athat the value of money, in countries
where it is an imported commodity, must be entirely regulated by its
value in the countries which produce it; and cannot be raised or lowered
in any permanent manner unless some change has taken place in the cost
of production at the mines. On the contrary, any circumstance which
disturbs the equation of international demand with respect to a
particular country, not only may, but must, affect the value of money in
that country—its value at the mines remaining the same. The opening of a
new branch of export trade from England; an increase in the foreign
demand for English products, either by the natural course of events, or
by the abrogation of duties; a check to the demand in England for
foreign commodities, by the laying on of import duties in England or of
export duties elsewhere; these and all other events of similar tendency,
would make the imports of England (bullion and other things taken
together) no longer an equivalent for btheb exports; and the countries
which take her exports would be obliged to offer their commodities, and
bullion among the rest, on cheaper terms, in order to re-establish the
equation of demand: and thus England would obtain money cheaper, and
would acquire a generally higher range of prices. Incidents the reverse
of these would produce effects the reverse—would reduce prices; or, in
other words, raise the value of the precious metals. It must be
observed, however, that money would be thus raised in value only with
respect to home commodities: in relation to all imported articles it
would remain as before, since their values would be affected in Edition:
current; Page: [622] the same way and in the same degree with its own. A
country which, from any of the causes mentioned, gets money cheaper,
obtains all its other imports cheaper likewise.

It is by no means necessary that the increased demand for English
commodities, which enables England to supply herself with bullion at a
cheaper rate, should be a demand in the mining countries. England might
export nothing whatever to those countries, and yet might be the country
which obtained bullion from them on the lowest terms, provided there
were a sufficient intensity of demand in other foreign countries for
English goods, which would be paid for circuitously, with gold and
silver from the mining countries. The whole of its exports are what a
country exchanges against the whole of its imports, and not its exports
and imports to and from any one country; and the general foreign demand
for its productions will determine what equivalent it must give for
imported goods, in order to establish an equilibrium between its sales
and purchases generally; without regard to the maintenance of a similar
equilibrium between it and any country singly.

Edition: current; Page: [623]


CHAPTER XX: Of the Foreign Exchanges

§ 1. [Purposes for which money passes from country to country as a
medium of exchange] We have thus far considered the precious metals as a
commodity, imported like other commodities in the common course of
trade, and have examined what are the circumstances which would in that
case determine their value. But those metals are also imported in
another character, that which belongs to them as a medium of exchange;
not as an article of commerce, to be sold for money, but as themselves
money, to pay a debt, or effect a transfer of property. It remains to
consider whether the liability of gold and silver to be transported from
country to country for such purposes, in any way modifies the
conclusions we have already arrived at, or places those metals under a
different law of value from that to which, in common with all other
imported commodities, they would be subject if international trade were
an affair of direct barter.

Money is sent from one country to another for various purposes: such as
the payment of tributes or subsidies; remittances of revenue to or from
dependencies, or of rents or other incomes to their absent owners;
emigration of capital, or transmission of it for foreign investment. The
most usual purpose, however, is that of payment for goods. To show in
what circumstances money actually passes from country to country for
this or any of the other purposes mentioned, it is necessary briefly to
state the nature of the mechanism by which international trade is
carried on, when it takes place not by barter but through the medium of
money.

§ 2. [Mode of adjusting international payments through the exchanges] In
practice, the exports and imports of a country not only are not
exchanged directly against each other, but often do not even pass
through the same hands. Each is separately bought and paid for with
money. We have seen, however, that, even in the same country, money does
not actually pass from hand to hand each time that purchases are made
with it, and still less does this happen between different countries.
The habitual mode of paying and receiving payment for commodities,
between country and country, is by bills of exchange.

Edition: current; Page: [624]
A merchant in England, A, has exported English commodities, consigning
them to his correspondent B in France. Another merchant in France, C,
has exported French commodities, suppose of equivalent value, to a
merchant D in England. It is evidently unnecessary that B in France
should send money to A in England, and that D in England should send an
equal sum of money to C in France. The one debt may be applied to the
payment of the other, and the double cost aand riska of carriage be thus
saved. A draws a bill on B for the amount which B owes to him: D, having
an equal amount to pay in France, buys this bill from A, and sends it to
C, who, at the expiration of the number of days which the bill has to
run, presents it to B for payment. Thus the debt due from France to
England, and the debt due from England to France, are both paid without
sending an ounce of gold or silver from one country to the other.

In this statement, however, it is supposed, that the sum of the debts
due from France to England, and the sum of those due from England to
France, are equal; that each country has exactly the same number of
ounces of gold or silver to pay and to receive. This implies (if we
exclude for the present any other international payments than those
occurring in the course of commerce), that the exports and imports
exactly pay for one another, or in other words, that the equation of
international demand is established. When such is the fact, the
international transactions are liquidated without the passage of any
money from one country to the other. But if there is a greater sum due
from England to France, than is due from France to England, or vice
versâ, the debts cannot be simply written off against one another. After
the one has been applied, as far as it will go, towards covering the
other, the balance must be transmitted in the precious metals. In point
of fact, the merchant who has the amount to pay, will even then pay for
it by a bill. When a person has a remittance to make to a foreign
country, he does not himself search for some one who has money to
receive from that country, and ask him for a bill of exchange. In this
as in other branches of business, there is a class of middlemen or
brokers, who bring buyers and sellers together, or stand between them,
buying bills from those who have money to receive, and selling bills to
those who have money to pay. When a customer comes to a broker for a
bill on Paris or Amsterdam, the broker sells to him, perhaps the bill he
may himself have bought that morning from a merchant, perhaps a bill on
his own correspondent in the foreign city: and to enable his
correspondent to pay, when due, all the bills he has granted, he remits
to him all those which he has bought and has not resold. In this manner
these bbrokersb take upon themselves the whole settlement of the
pecuniary transactions between distant places, being Edition: current;
Page: [625] remunerated by a small commission or percentage on the
amount of each bill which they either sell or buy. Now, if the brokers
find that they are asked for bills on the one part, to a greater amount
than bills are offered to them on the other, they do not on this account
refuse to give them; but since, in that case, they have no means of
enabling the correspondents on whom their bills are drawn, to pay them
when due, except by transmitting part of the amount in gold or silver,
they require from those to whom they sell bills an additional price,
sufficient to cover the freight and insurance of the gold and silver,
with a profit sufficient to compensate them for their trouble and for
the temporary occupation of a portion of their capital. This premium (as
it is called) the buyers are willing to pay, because they must otherwise
go to the expense of remitting the precious metals themselves, and it is
done cheaper by those who make doing it a part of their especial
business. But though only some of those who have a debt to pay would
have actually to remit money, all will be obliged, by each other’s
competition, to pay the premium; and the brokers are for the same reason
obliged to pay it to those whose bills they buy. The reverse of all this
happens, if on the comparison of exports and imports, the country,
instead of having a balance to pay, has a balance to receive. The
brokers find more bills offered to them, than are sufficient to cover
those which they are required to grant. Bills on foreign countries
consequently fall to a discount; and the competition among the brokers,
which is exceedingly active, prevents them from retaining this discount
as a profit for themselves, and obliges them to give the benefit of it
to those who buy the bills for purposes of remittance.

Let us suppose that all countries had the same currency, as in the
progress of political improvement they one day will have: and, as cthec
most familiar to the reader, dthough not the best,d let us suppose this
currency to be the English. When England had the same number of pounds
sterling to pay to France, which France had to pay to her, one set of
merchants in England would want bills, and another set would have bills
to dispose of, for the very same number of pounds sterling; and
consequently a bill on France for 100l. would sell for exactly 100l.,
or, in the phraseology of merchants, the exchange would be at par. As
France also, on this supposition, would have an equal number of pounds
sterling to pay and to receive, bills on England would be at par in
France, whenever bills on France were at par in England.

If, however, England had a larger sum to pay to France than to receive
from her, there would be persons requiring bills on France for a greater
number of pounds sterling than there were bills drawn by persons to whom
money was due. A bill on France for 100l. would then sell for more than
Edition: current; Page: [626] 100l., and bills would be said to be at a
premium. The premium, however, could not exceed the cost and risk of
making the remittance in gold, together with a trifling profit; because
if it did, the debtor would send the gold itself, in preference to
buying the bill.

If, on the contrary, England had more money to receive from France than
to pay, there would be bills offered for a greater number of pounds than
were wanted for remittance, and the price of bills would fall below par:
a bill for 100l. might be bought for somewhat less than 100l., and bills
would be said to be at a discount.

When England has more to pay than to receive, France has more to receive
than to pay, and vice versâ. When, therefore, in England, bills on
France bear a premium, then, in France, bills on England are at a
discount: and when bills on France are at a discount in England, bills
on England are at a premium in France. If they are at par in either
country, they are so, as we have already seen, in both.

Thus do matters stand between countries, or places, which have the same
currency. So much of barbarism, however, still remains in the
transactions of the most civilized nations, that almost all independent
countries choose to assert their nationality by having, to their own
inconvenience and that of their neighbours, a peculiar currency of their
own. To our present purpose this makes no other difference, than that
instead of speaking of equal sums of money, we have to speak of
equivalent sums. By equivalent sums, when both currencies are composed
of the same metal, are meant sums which contain exactly the same
quantity of the metal, in weight and fineness; but when, as in the case
of France and England, the metals are different, what is meant is that
the quantity of gold in the one sum, and the quantity of silver in the
other, are of the same value in the general market of the world: there
being no material difference between one place and another in the
relative value of these metals. Suppose 25 francs to be (as within a
trifling fraction it is) the equivalent of a pound sterling. The debts
and credits of the two countries would be equal, when the one owed as
many times 25 francs, as the other owed pounds. When this was the case,
a bill on France for 2500 francs would be worth in England 100l., and a
bill on England for 100l. would be worth in France 2500 francs. The
exchange is then said to be at par: and 25 francs (in reality 25 francs
and a trifle more)* is called the par of exchange with France. When
England owed to France more than the equivalent of what France owed to
her, a bill for 2500 francs would be at a premium, that is, would
Edition: current; Page: [627] be worth more than 100l. When France owed
to England more than the equivalent of what England owed to France, a
bill for 2500 francs would be worth less than 100l., or would be at a
discount.

When bills on foreign countries are at a premium, it is customary to say
that the exchanges are against the country, or unfavourable to it. In
order to understand these phrases, we must take notice of what “the
exchange,” in the language of merchants, really means. It means the
power which the money of the country has of purchasing the money of
other countries. Supposing 25 francs to be the exact par of exchange,
then when it requires more than 100l. to buy a bill for 2500 francs,
100l. of English money are worth less than their real equivalent of
French money: and this is called an exchange unfavourable to England.
The only persons in England, however, to whom it is really unfavourable,
are those who have money to pay in France; for they come into the bill
market as buyers, and have to pay a premium: but to those who have money
to receive in France, the same state of things is favourable; for they
come as sellers, and receive the premium. The premium, however,
indicates that a balance is due by England, which emight have toe be
eventually liquidated in the precious metals: and since, according to
the old theory, the benefit of a trade consisted in bringing money into
the country, this prejudice introduced the practice of calling the
exchange favourable when it indicated a balance to receive, and
unfavourable when it indicated one to pay: and the phrases in turn
tended to maintain the prejudice.

§ 3. [Distinction between variations in the exchanges which are
self-adjusting, and those which can only be rectified through prices] It
might be supposed at first sight that when the exchange is unfavourable,
or in other words, when bills are at a premium, the premium must always
amount to a full equivalent for the cost of transmitting money: since,
as there is really a balance to pay, and as the full cost must therefore
be incurred by some of those who have remittances to make, their
competition will compel all to submit to an equivalent sacrifice. And
such would certainly be the case, if it were always necessary that
whatever is destined to be paid should be paid immediately. The
expectation of great and immediate foreign payments sometimes produces a
most startling effect on the exchanges.* But Edition: current; Page:
[628] a small excess of imports above exports, or any other small amount
of debt to be paid to foreign countries, does not usually affect the
exchanges to the full extent of the cost and risk of transporting
bullion. The length of credit allowed, generally permits, on the part of
some of the debtors, a postponement of payment, and in the mean time the
balance may turn the other way, and restore the equality of debts and
credits without any actual transmission of the metals. And this is the
more likely to happen, as there is a self-adjusting power in the
variations of the exchange itself. Bills are at a premium because a
greater money value has been imported than exported. But the premium is
itself an extra profit to those who export. Besides the price they
obtain for their goods, they draw for the amount and gain the premium.
It is, on the other hand, a diminution of profit to those who import.
Besides the price of the goods, they have to pay a premium for
remittance. So that what is called an unfavourable exchange is an
encouragement to export, and a discouragement to import. And if the
balance due is of small amount, and is the consequence of some merely
casual disturbance in the ordinary course of trade, it is soon
liquidated in commodities, and the account adjusted by means of bills,
without the transmission of any bullion. Not so, however, when the
excess of imports above exports, which has made the exchange
unfavourable, arises from a permanent cause. In that case, what
disturbed the equilibrium must have been the state of prices, and it can
only be restored by acting on prices. It is impossible that prices
should be such as to invite to an excess of imports, and yet that the
exports should be kept permanently up to the imports by the extra profit
on exportation derived from the premium on bills; for if the exports
awerea kept up to the imports, bills would not be at a premium, and the
extra profit would not exist. It is through the prices of commodities
that the correction must be administered.

Disturbances, therefore, of the equilibrium of imports and exports, and
consequent disturbances of the exchange, may be considered as of two
classes; the one casual or accidental, which, if not on too large a
scale, correct themselves through the premium on bills, without any
transmission of the precious metals; the other arising from the general
state of prices, which cannot be corrected without the subtraction of
actual money from the Edition: current; Page: [629] circulation of one
of the countries, or an annihilation of credit equivalent to it; since
the mere transmission of bullion (as distinguished from money), not
having any effect on prices, is of no avail to abate the cause from
which the disturbance proceeded.

It remains to observe, that the exchanges do not depend on the balance
of debts and credits with each country separately, but with all
countries taken together. England may owe a balance of payments to
France; but it does not follow that the exchange with France will be
against England, and that bills on France will be at a premium; because
a balance may be due to England from Holland or Hamburg, and she may pay
her bdebtsb to France with bills on those places; which is technically
called arbitration of exchange. There is some little additional expense,
partly commission and partly loss of interest, in settling debts in this
circuitous manner, and to the extent of that small difference the
exchange with one country may vary apart from that with others; but in
the main, the exchanges with all foreign countries vary together,
according as the country has a balance to receive or to pay on the
general result of its foreign transactions.

Edition: current; Page: [630]


CHAPTER XXI: Of the Distribution of the Precious Metals Through the Commercial World

§ 1. [The substitution of money for barter makes no difference in
exports and imports, nor in the law of international values] Having now
examined the mechanism by which the commercial transactions between
nations are actually conducted, we have next to inquire whether this
mode of conducting them makes any difference in the conclusions
respecting international values, which we previously arrived at on the
hypothesis of barter.

The nearest analogy would lead us to presume the negative. We did not
find that the intervention of money and its substitutes made any
difference in the law of value as applied to adjacent places. Things
which would have been equal in value if the mode of exchange had been by
barter, are worth equal sums of money. The introduction of money is a
mere addition of one more commodity, of which the value is regulated by
the same laws as that of all other commodities. We shall not be
surprised, therefore, if we find that international values also are
determined by the same causes under a money and bill system, as they
would be under a system of barter; and that money has little to do in
the matter, except to furnish a convenient mode of comparing values.

All interchange is, in substance and effect, barter: awhoevera sells
bcommoditiesb for money, and with that money buys other goods, really
buys those goods with his own ccommoditiesc. And so of nations: their
trade is a mere exchange of exports for imports: and whether money is
employed or not, things are only in their permanent state when the
exports and imports exactly pay for each other. When this is the case,
equal sums of money are due from each country to the other, the debts
are settled by bills, and there is no balance to be paid in the precious
metals. The trade is in a state like that which is called in mechanics a
condition of stable equilibrium.

Edition: current; Page: [631]
But the process by which things are brought back to this state when they
happen to deviate from it, is, at least outwardly, not the same in a
barter system and in a money system. Under the first, the country which
wants more imports than its exports will pay for, must offer its exports
at a cheaper rate, as the sole means of creating a demand for them
sufficient to re-establish the equilibrium. When money is used, the
country seems to do a thing totally different. She takes the additional
imports at the same price as before, and as she exports no equivalent,
the balance of payments turns against her; the exchange becomes
unfavourable, and the difference has to be paid in money. This is in
appearance a very distinct operation from the former. Let us see if it
differs in its essence, or only in its mechanism.

Let the country which has the balance to pay be England, and the country
which receives it, France. By this transmission of the precious metals,
the quantity of the currency is diminished in England, and increased in
France. This I am at liberty to assume. As we shall see hereafter, it
would be a very erroneous assumption if made in regard to all payments
of international balances. A balance which has only to be paid once,
such as the payment made for an extra importation of corn in a season of
dearth, may be paid from hoards, or from the reserves of bankers,
without acting on the circulation. But we are now supposing that there
is an excess of imports over exports, arising from the fact that the
equation of international demand is not yet established: that there is
at the ordinary prices a permanent demand in England for more French
goods than the English goods required in France at the ordinary prices
will pay for. When this is the case, if a change were not made in the
prices, there would be a perpetually renewed balance to be paid in
money. The imports require to be permanently diminished, or the exports
to be increased; which can only be accomplished through prices; and
hence, even if the balances are at first paid from hoards, or by the
exportation of bullion, they will reach the circulation at last, for
until they do, nothing can stop the drain.

When, therefore, the state of prices is such that the equation of
international demand cannot establish itself, the country requiring more
imports than can be paid for by dthed exports; it is a sign that the
country has more of the precious metals or their substitutes, in
circulation, than can permanently circulate, and must necessarily part
with some of them before the balance can be restored. eThee currency is
accordingly contracted: prices fall, and among the rest, the prices of
exportable articles; for which, accordingly, there arises, in foreign
countries, a greater demand: while imported commodities have possibly
risen in price, from the influx of money into foreign countries, and at
all events have not participated in the general Edition: current; Page:
[632] fall. But until the increased cheapness of English goods induces
foreign countries to take a greater pecuniary value, or until the
increased dearness (positive or comparative) of foreign goods makes
England take a less pecuniary value, the exports of England will be no
nearer to paying for fthef imports than before, and the stream of the
precious metals which had begun to flow out of England, will still flow
on. This efflux will continue, until the fall of prices in England
brings within reach of the foreign market some commodity which England
did not previously send thither; or until the reduced price of the
things which she did send, has forced a demand abroad for a sufficient
quantity to pay for the imports, aided, perhaps, by a reduction of the
English demand for foreign goods, gthroughg their enhanced price, either
positive or comparative.

Now this is the very process which took place on our original
supposition of barter. Not only, therefore, does the trade between
nations tend to the same equilibrium between exports and imports,
whether money is employed or not, but the means by which this
equilibrium is established are essentially the same. The country whose
exports are not sufficient to pay for her imports, offers them on
cheaper terms, until she succeeds in forcing the necessary demand: in
other words, the Equation of International Demand, under a money system
as well as under a barter system, is htheh law of international trade.
Every country exports and imports the very same things, and in the very
same quantity, under the one system as under the other. In a barter
system, the trade gravitates to the point at which the sum of the
imports exactly exchanges for the sum of the exports: in a money system,
it gravitates to the point at which the sum of the imports and the sum
of the exports exchange for the same quantity of money. And since things
which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another, the exports
and imports which are equal in money price, would, if money were not
used, precisely exchange for one another.*

Edition: current; Page: [633]
§ 2. [The preceding theorem further illustrated] It thus appears that
the law of international values, and, consequently, the division of the
advantages of trade among the nations which carry it on, are the same,
on the supposition of money, as they would be in a state of barter. In
international, as in ordinary domestic interchanges, money is to
commerce only what oil is to machinery, or railways to locomotion—a
contrivance to diminish friction. In order still further to test these
conclusions, let us Edition: current; Page: [634] proceed to re-examine,
on the supposition of money, a question which we have already
investigated on the hypothesis of barter, namely, to what extent the
benefit of an improvement in the production of an exportable article, is
participated in by the countries importing it.

The improvement may either consist in the cheapening of some article
which was already a staple production of the country, or in the
establishment of some new branch of industry, or of some process
rendering an article exportable which had not till then been exported at
all. It will be convenient to begin with the case of a new export, as
being somewhat the simpler of the two.

Edition: current; Page: [635]
The first effect is that the article falls in price, and a demand arises
for it abroad. This new exportation disturbs the balance, turns the
exchanges, money flows into the country (which we shall suppose to be
England), and continues to flow until prices rise. This higher range of
prices will somewhat check the demand aina foreign countries for the new
article of export; and diminish the demand which existed abroad for the
other things which England was in the habit of exporting. The exports
will thus be diminished; while at the same time the English public,
having more money, will have a greater power of purchasing foreign
commodities. If they make use of this increased power of purchase, there
will be an increase of imports: and by this, and the check to
exportation, the equilibrium of imports and bexportsb will be restored.
The result to foreign countries will be, that they have to pay dearer
than before for their other imports, and obtain the new commodity
cheaper than before, but not so much cheaper as England herself does. I
say this, being well aware that the article would be actually at the
very same price (cost of carriage excepted) in England and in other
countries. The cheapness, however, of the article is not measured solely
by the money-price, but by that price compared with the money incomes of
the consumers. The price is the same to the English and to the foreign
consumers; but the former pay that price from money incomes which have
been increased by the new distribution of the precious metals; while the
latter have had their money incomes probably diminished by the same
cause. The trade, therefore, has not imparted to the foreign consumer
the whole, but only a portion, of the benefit which the English consumer
has derived from the improvement; while England has also benefited in
the prices of foreign commodities. Thus, then, any industrial
improvement which leads to the opening of a new branch of export trade,
benefits a country not only by the cheapness of the article in which the
improvement has taken place, but by a general cheapening of all imported
products.

Let us now change the hypothesis, and suppose that the improvement,
instead of creating a new export from England, cheapens an existing one.
When we examined this case on the supposition of barter, it appeared to
us that the foreign consumers might either obtain the same benefit from
the improvement as England herself, or a less benefit, or even a greater
benefit, according to the degree in which the consumption of the
cheapened article is calculated to extend itself as the article
diminishes in price. The same conclusions will be found true on the
supposition of money.

Let the commodity in which there is an improvement, be cloth. The first
effect of the improvement is that its price falls, and there is an
increased demand for it in the foreign market. But this demand is of
uncertain amount. Suppose the foreign consumers to increase their
purchases in the Edition: current; Page: [636] exact ratio of the
cheapness, or in other words, to lay out in cloth the same sum of money
as before; the same aggregate payment as before will be due from foreign
countries to England; the equilibrium of exports and imports will remain
undisturbed, and foreigners will obtain the full advantage of the
increased cheapness of cloth. But if the foreign demand for cloth is of
such a character as to increase in a greater ratio than the cheapness, a
larger sum than formerly will be due to England for cloth, and when paid
will raise English prices, the price of cloth included; this rise,
however, will affect only the foreign purchaser, English incomes being
raised in a corresponding proportion; and the foreign consumer will thus
derive a less advantage than England from the improvement. If, on the
contrary, the cheapening of cloth does not extend the foreign demand for
it in a proportional degree, a less sum of debts than before will be due
to England for cloth, while there will be the usual sum of debts due
from England to foreign countries; the balance of trade will turn
against England, money will be exported, prices (that of cloth included)
will fall, and cloth will eventually be cheapened to the foreign
purchaser in a still greater ratio, than the improvement has cheapened
it to England. These are the very conclusions which we deduced on the
hypothesis of barter.

The result of the preceding discussion cannot be better summed up than
in the words of Ricardo.* “Gold and silver having been chosen for the
general medium of circulation, they are, by the competition of commerce,
distributed in such proportions amongst the different countries of the
world as to accommodate themselves to the natural traffic which would
take place if no such metals existed, and the trade between countries
were purely a trade of barter.” Of this principle, so fertile in
consequences, previous to which the theory of foreign trade was an
unintelligible chaos, Mr. Ricardo, though he did not pursue it into its
ramifications, was the real originator. No writer who preceded him
appears to have had a glimpse of it: and few are those who even since
his time have had an adequate conception of its scientific value.

§ 3. [The precious metals, as money, are of the same value, and
distribute themselves according to the same law, with the precious
metals as a commodity] It is now necessary to inquire, in what manner
this law of the distribution of the precious metals by means of the
exchanges, affects the exchange value of money itself; and how it
tallies with the law by which we found that the value of money is
regulated when imported as a mere article of merchandize. For there is
here a semblance of contradiction, which has, I think, contributed more
than anything else to make some distinguished political economists
resist the evidence of the preceding Edition: current; Page: [637]
doctrines. Money, they justly think, is no exception to the general laws
of value; it is a commodity like any other, and its average or natural
value must depend on the cost of producing, or at least of obtaining it.
That its distribution through the world, therefore, and its different
value in different places, should be liable to be altered, not by causes
affecting itself, but by a hundred causes unconnected with it; by
everything which affects the trade in other commodities, so as to
derange the equilibrium of exports and imports; appears to these
thinkers a doctrine altogether inadmissible.

But the supposed anomaly exists only in semblance. The causes which
bring money into or carry it out of a country through the exchanges, to
restore the equilibrium of trade, and which thereby raise its value in
some countries and lower it in others, are the very same causes on which
the local value of money would depend, if it were never imported except
as a merchandize, and never except directly from the mines. When the
value of money in a country is permanently lowered by an influx of it
through the balance of trade, the cause, if it is not diminished cost of
production, must be one of those causes which compel a new adjustment,
more favourable to the country, of the equation of international demand:
namely, either an increased demand abroad for her commodities, or a
diminished demand on her part for those of foreign countries. Now an
increased foreign demand for the commodities of a country, or a
diminished demand in the country for imported commodities, are the very
causes which, on the general principles of trade, enable a country to
purchase all imports, and consequently the precious metals, at a lower
value. There is therefore no contradiction, but the most perfect
accordance in the results of the two different modes in which the
precious metals may be obtained. When money flows from country to
country in consequence of changes in the international demand for
commodities, and by so doing alters its own local value, it merely
realizes, by a more rapid process, the effect which would otherwise take
place more slowly, by an alteration in the relative breadth of the
streams by which the precious metals flow into different regions of the
earth from the mining countries. As therefore we before saw that the use
of money as a medium of exchange does not in the least alter the law on
which the values of other things, either in the same country or
internationally, depend, so neither does it alter the law of the value
of the precious metal itself: and there is in the whole doctrine of
international values as now laid down, a unity and harmony which is a
strong collateral presumption of truth.

§ 4. [International payments aof a non-commerciala character] Before
closing this discussion, it is fitting to point out in what manner and
degree Edition: current; Page: [638] the preceding conclusions are
affected by the existence of international payments not originating in
commerce, and for which no equivalent in either money or commodities is
expected or received; such as a tribute, or remittances of rent to
absentee landlords, or of interest to foreign creditors, or a government
expenditure abroad, such as England incurs in the management of some of
her colonial dependencies.

To begin with the case of barter. The supposed annual remittances being
made in commodities, and being exports for which there is to be no
return, it is no longer requisite that the imports and exports should
pay for one another: on the contrary, there must be an annual excess of
exports over imports, equal to the value of the remittance. If, before
the country became liable to the annual payment, foreign commerce was in
its natural state of equilibrium, it will now be necessary for the
purpose of effecting the bremittanceb, that foreign countries should be
induced to take a greater quantity of exports than before: which can
only be done by offering those exports on cheaper terms, or in other
words, by paying dearer for foreign commodities. The international
values will so adjust themselves that either by greater exports, or
smaller imports, or both, the requisite excess on the side of exports
will be brought about; and this excess will become the permanent state.
The result is that a country which makes regular payments to foreign
countries, besides losing what it pays, loses also something more, by
the less advantageous terms on which it is forced to exchange its
productions for foreign commodities.

The same results follow on the supposition of money. Commerce being
supposed to be in a state of equilibrium when the obligatory remittances
begin, the first remittance is necessarily made in money. This lowers
prices in the remitting country, and raises them in the receiving. The
natural effect is that more commodities are exported than before, and
fewer imported, and that, on the score of commerce alone, a balance of
money will be constantly due from the receiving to the paying country.
When the debt thus annually due to the tributary country becomes equal
to the annual tribute or other regular payment due from it, no further
transmission of money takes place; the equilibrium of exports and
imports will no longer exist, but that of payments will; the exchange
will be at par, the two debts will be set off against one another, and
the tribute or remittance will be virtually paid in goods. The result to
the cinterestc of the two countries will be as already pointed out: the
paying country will give a higher price for all that it buys from the
receiving country, while the latter, besides receiving the tribute,
obtains the exportable produce of the tributary country at a lower
price.

Edition: current; Page: [639]


CHAPTER XXII: Influence of the Currency on athea Exchanges and on Foreign Trade

§ 1. [Variations in the exchange which originate in the currency] In our
inquiry into the laws of international trade, we commenced with the
principles which determine international exchanges and international
values on the hypothesis of barter. We next showed that the introduction
of money as a medium of exchange, makes no difference in the laws of
exchanges and of values between country and country, no more than
between individual and individual: since the precious metals, under the
influence of those same laws, distribute themselves in such proportions
among the different countries of the world, as to allow the very same
exchanges to go on, and at the same values, as would be the case under a
system of barter. We lastly considered how the value of money itself is
affected, by those alterations in the state of trade which arise from
alterations either in the demand and supply of commodities, or in their
cost of production. It remains to consider the alterations in the state
of trade which originate not in commodities but in money.

Gold and silver may vary like other things, though they are not bso
likely to varyb as other things, in their cost of production. The demand
for them in foreign countries may also vary. It may increase, by
augmented employment of the metals for purposes of art and ornament, or
because the increase of production and of transactions has created a
greater amount of business to be done by the circulating medium. It may
diminish, for the opposite reasons; or from the extension of the
economizing expedients by which the use of metallic money is partially
dispensed with. These changes act upon the trade between other countries
and the mining countries, and upon the value of the precious metals,
according to the general laws of the value of imported commodities:
which have been set forth in the previous chapters with sufficient
fulness.

Edition: current; Page: [640]
What I propose to examine in the present chapter, is not those
circumstances affecting money, which alter the permanent conditions of
its value; but the effects produced on international trade by casual or
temporary variations in the value of money, which have no connexion with
any causes affecting its permanent value. This is a subject of
importance, on account of its bearing upon the practical problem which
has excited so much discussion for csixtyc years past, the regulation of
the currency.

§ 2. [Effect of a sudden increase of a metallic currency, or of the
sudden creation of bank notes or other substitutes for money] Let us
suppose in any country a circulating medium purely metallic, and a
sudden casual increase made to it; for example, by bringing ainto
circulation hoards of treasure, which had been concealed in a previous
period of foreign invasion or internal disorder. The natural effect
would be a rise of prices. This would check exports, and encourage
imports; the imports would exceed the exports, the exchanges would
become unfavourable, and the newly acquired stock of money would diffuse
itself over all countries with which the supposed country carried on
trade, and from them, progressively, through all parts of the commercial
world. The money which thus overflowed would spread itself to an equal
depth over all commercial countries. For it would go on flowing until
the exports and imports again balanced one another: and this (as no
change is supposed in the permanent circumstances of international
demand) could only be, when the money had diffused itself so equally
that prices had risen in the same ratio in all countries, so that the
alteration of price would be for all practical purposes ineffective, and
the exports and imports, though at a higher money valuation, would be
exactly the same as they were originally. This diminished value of money
throughout the world, b(at least if the diminution was considerable)b
would cause a suspension, or at least a diminution, of the annual supply
from the mines: since the metal would no longer command a value
equivalent to its highest cost of production. The annual waste would,
therefore, not be fully made up, and the usual causes of destruction
would gradually reduce the aggregate quantity of the precious metals to
its former amount; after which their production would recommence on its
former scale. The discovery of the treasure would thus produce only
temporary effects; namely, a brief disturbance of international trade
until the treasure had disseminated itself through the world, and then a
temporary depression in the value of the metal, below that which
corresponds to the cost of producing or of obtaining it; which
depression would gradually be corrected, by a temporarily diminished
production in the producing countries, and importation in the importing
countries.

Edition: current; Page: [641]
The same effects which would thus arise from the discovery of a
treasure, accompany the process by which bank notes, or any of the other
substitutes for money, take the place of the precious metals. Suppose
that England possessed a currency wholly metallic, of twenty millions
sterling, and that suddenly twenty millions of bank notes were sent into
circulation. If these were issued by bankers, they would be employed in
loans, or in the purchase of securities, and would therefore create a
sudden fall in the rate of interest, which would probably send a great
part of the twenty millions of gold out of the country as capital, to
seek a higher rate of interest elsewhere, before there had been time for
any action on prices. But we will suppose that the notes are not issued
by bankers, or money-lenders of any kind, but by manufacturers, in the
payment of wages and purchase of materials, or by the government in its
ordinary expenses, so that the whole amount would be rapidly carried
into the markets for commodities. The following would be the natural
order of consequences. All prices would rise greatly. Exportation would
almost cease; importation would be prodigiously stimulated. A great
balance of payments would become due; the exchanges would turn against
England, to the full extent of the cost of exporting money; and the
surplus coin would pour itself rapidly forth, over the various countries
of the world, in the order of their proximity, geographically and
commercially, to England. The efflux would continue until the currencies
of all countries had come to a level; by which I do not mean, until
money became of the same value everywhere, but until the differences
were only those which existed before, and which corresponded to
permanent differences in the cost of obtaining it. When the rise of
prices had extended itself in an equal degree to all countries, exports
and imports would everywhere revert to what they were at first, would
balance one another, and the exchanges would return to par. cIf such a
sum of money as twenty millions, when spread over the whole surface of
the commercial world, were sufficient to raise the general level in a
perceptible degree, the effect would be of no long duration.c No
alteration having occurred in the general conditions under which the
metals were procured, either in the world at large or in any part of it,
the reduced value would no longer be remunerating, and the supply from
the mines would cease partially or wholly, until the twenty millions
were absorbed;* after which absorption, the currencies Edition: current;
Page: [642] of all countries would be, in quantity and in value, nearly
at their original level. I say nearly, for in strict accuracy there
would be a slight difference. A somewhat smaller annual supply of the
precious metals would now be required, there being in the world twenty
millions less of metallic money undergoing waste. The equilibrium of
payments, consequently, between the mining countries and the rest of the
world, would thenceforth require that the mining countries should either
export rather more of something else, or import rather less of foreign
commodities; which implies a somewhat lower range of prices than
previously in the mining countries, and a somewhat higher in all others;
a scantier currency in the former, and rather fuller currencies in the
latter. This effect, which would be too trifling to require notice
except for the illustration of a principle, is the only permanent change
which would be produced on international trade, or on the value or
quantity of the currency of any country.

Effects of another kind, however, will have been produced. Twenty
millions which formerly existed in the unproductive form of metallic
money, have been converted into what is, or is capable of becoming,
productive capital. This gain is at first made by England at the expense
of other countries, who have taken her superfluity of this costly and
unproductive article off her hands, giving for it an equivalent value in
other commodities. By degree the loss is made up to those countries by
diminished influx from the mines, and finally the world has gained a
virtual addition of twenty millions to its productive resources. Adam
Smith’s illustration, though so well known, deserves for its extreme
aptness to be once more repeated. He compares the substitution of paper
in the room of the precious metals, to the construction of a highway
through the air, by which the ground now occupied by roads would become
available for agriculture. As in that case a portion of the soil, so in
this a part of the accumulated wealth of the country, would be relieved
from a function in which it was only employed in rendering other soils
and capitals productive, and would itself become applicable to
production; the office it previously fulfilled being equally well
discharged by a medium which costs nothing.

The value saved to the community by thus dispensing with metallic money,
is a clear gain to those who provide the substitute. They have the use
of twenty millions of circulating medium which have cost them only the
expense of an engraver’s plate. If they employ this accession to their
fortunes as productive capital, the produce of the country is increased,
and the community benefited, as much as by any other capital of equal
amount. Whether it is so employed or not, depends, in some degree, upon
the mode of issuing it. If issued by the government, and employed in
paying off debt, it would probably become productive capital. The
government, however, Edition: current; Page: [643] may prefer employing
this extraordinary resource in its ordinary expenses; may squander it
uselessly, or make it a mere temporary substitute for taxation to an
equivalent amount; in which last case the amount is saved by the
taxpayers at large, who either add it to their capital or spend it as
income. When paper currency is supplied, as in our own country, by
bankers and banking companies, the amount is almost wholly turned into
productive capital: for the issuers, being at all times liable to be
called upon to refund the value, are under the strongest inducements not
to squander it, and the only cases in which it is not forthcoming are
cases of fraud or mismanagement. A banker’s profession being that of a
money-lender, his issue of notes is a simple extension of his ordinary
occupation. He lends the amount to farmers, manufacturers, or dealers,
who employ it in their several businesses. So employed, it yields, like
any other capital, wages of labour and profits of stock. The profit is
shared between the banker, who receives interest, and a succession of
borrowers, mostly for short periods, who after paying the interest, gain
a profit in addition, or a convenience equivalent to profit. The capital
itself in the long run becomes entirely wages, and when replaced by the
sale of the produce, becomes wages again; thus affording a perpetual
fund, of the value of twenty millions, for the maintenance of productive
labour, and increasing the annual produce of the country by all that can
be produced through the means of a capital of that value. To this gain
must be added a further saving to the country, of the annual supply of
the precious metals necessary for repairing the wear and tear, and other
waste, of a metallic currency.

The substitution, therefore, of paper for the precious metals, should
always be carried as far as is consistent with safety; no greater amount
of metallic currency being retained than is necessary to maintain, both
in fact and in public belief, the convertibility of the paper. A country
with the extensive commercial relations of England is liable to be
suddenly called upon for large foreign payments, sometimes in loans, or
other investments of capital abroad, sometimes as the price of some
unusual importation of goods, the most frequent case being that of large
importations of food consequent on a bad harvest. To meet such demands
it is necessary that there should be, either in circulation or in the
coffers of the banks, coin or bullion to a very considerable amount, and
that this, when drawn out by any emergency, should be allowed to return
after the emergency is past. But since gold wanted for exportation is
almost invariably drawn from the reserves of the banks, and is never
likely to be taken directly from the circulation while the banks remain
solvent, the only advantage which can be obtained from retaining
partially a metallic currency for daily purposes is, that the banks may
occasionally replenish their reserves from it.

Edition: current; Page: [644]
§ 3. [Effect of the increase of an inconvertible paper currency. Real
and nominal exchange] When metallic money had been entirely superseded
and expelled from circulation, by the substitution of an equal amount of
bank notes, any attempt to keep a still further quantity of paper in
circulation must, if the notes are convertible, be a complete failure.
The new issue would again set in motion the same train of consequences
by which the gold coin had already been expelled. The metals would, as
before, be required for exportation, and would be for that purpose
demanded from the banks, to the full extent of the superfluous notes;
which thus could not possibly be retained in circulation. If, indeed,
the notes were inconvertible, there would be no such obstacle to the
increase of their quantity. An inconvertible paper acts in the same way
as a convertible, while there remains any coin for it to supersede: the
difference begins to manifest itself when all the coin is driven from
circulation (except what may be retained for the convenience of small
change), and the issues still go on increasing. When the paper begins to
exceed in quantity the metallic currency which it superseded, prices of
course rise; things which were worth 5l. in metallic money, become worth
6l. in inconvertible paper, or more, as the case may be. But this rise
of price will not, as in the cases before examined, stimulate import,
and discourage export. The imports and exports are determined by the
metallic prices of things, not by the paper prices: and it is only when
the paper is exchangeable at pleasure for the metals, that apapera
prices and metallic prices must correspond.

Let us suppose that England is the country which has the depreciated
paper. Suppose that some English production could be bought, while the
currency was still metallic, for 5l., and sold in France for 5l. 10s.,
the difference covering the expense and risk, and affording a profit to
the merchant. On account of the depreciation this commodity will now
cost in England 6l., and cannot be sold in France for more than 5l.
10s., and yet it will be exported as before. Why? Because the 5l. 10s.
which the exporter can get for it in France, is not depreciated paper,
but gold or silver: and since in England bullion has risen, in the same
proportion with other things—if the merchant brings the gold or silver
to England, he can sell his 5l. 10s. for 6l. 12s., and obtain as before
10 per cent for profit and expenses.

It thus appears, that a depreciation of the currency does not affect the
foreign trade of the country: this is carried on precisely as if the
currency maintained its value. But though the trade is not affected, the
exchanges are. When the imports and exports are in equilibrium, the
exchange, in a metallic currency, would be at par; a bill on France for
the equivalent of five sovereigns, would be worth five sovereigns. But
five sovereigns, or the Edition: current; Page: [645] quantity of gold
contained in them, having come to be worth in England 6l., it follows
that a bill on France for 5l. will be worth 6l. When, therefore, the
real exchange is at par, there will be a nominal exchange against the
country, of as much per cent as the amount of the depreciation. If the
currency is depreciated 10, 15, or 20 per cent, then in whatever way the
real exchange, arising from the variations of international debts and
credits, may vary, the bquotedb exchange will always differ 10, 15, or
20 per cent from it. However high this nominal premium may be, it has no
tendency to send gold out of the country, for the purpose of drawing a
bill against it and profiting by the premium; because the gold so sent
must be procured, not from the banks and at par, as in the case of a
convertible currency, but in the market at an advance of price equal to
the premium. In such cases, instead of saying that the exchange is
unfavourable, it would be a more correct representation to say that the
par has altered, since there is now required a larger quantity of
English currency to be equivalent to the same quantity of foreign. The
exchanges, however, continue to be computed according to the metallic
par. The quoted exchanges, therefore, when there is a depreciated
currency, are compounded of two elements or factors; the real exchange,
which follows the variations of international payments, and the nominal
exchange, which varies with the depreciation of the currency, but which,
while there is any depreciation at all, must always be unfavourable.
Since the amount of depreciation is exactly measured by the degree in
which the market price of bullion exceeds the Mint valuation, we have a
sure criterion to determine what portion of the quoted exchange, being
referable to depreciation, may be struck off as nominal; the result so
corrected expressing the real exchange.

The same disturbance of the exchanges and of international trade, which
is produced by an increased issue of convertible bank notes, is in like
manner produced by those extensions of credit, which, as was so fully
shown in a preceding chapter, have the same effect on prices as an
increase of the currency. Whenever circumstances have given such an
impulse to the spirit of speculation as to occasion a great increase of
purchases on credit, money prices rise, just as much as they would have
risen if each person who so buys on credit had bought with money. All
the effects, therefore, must be similar. As a consequence of high
prices, exportation is checked and importation stimulated; though in
fact the increase of importation seldom waits for the rise of prices
which is the consequence of speculation, inasmuch as some of the great
articles of import are usually among the things in which speculative
overtrading first shows itself. There is, therefore, in such periods,
usually a great excess of imports over exports; and when the time comes
at which these must be paid for, the exchanges Edition: current; Page:
[646] become unfavourable, and gold flows out of the country. In what
precise manner this efflux of gold takes effect on prices, depends on
circumstances of which we shall presently speak more fully; but that its
effect is to make them recoil downwards, is certain and evident. The
recoil, once begun, generally becomes a total rout, and the unusual
extension of credit is rapidly exchanged for an unusual contraction of
it. Accordingly, when credit has been imprudently stretched, and the
speculative spirit carried to excess, the turn of the exchanges, and
consequent pressure on the banks to obtain gold for exportation, are
generally the proximate cause of the catastrophe. But these phenomena,
though a conspicuous accompaniment, are no essential part, of the
collapse of credit called a commercial crisis; which, as we formerly
showed,* might happen to as great an extent, and is quite as likely to
happen, in a country, if any such there were, altogether destitute of
foreign trade.

Edition: current; Page: [647]


CHAPTER XXIII: Of the Rate of Interest

§ 1. [The rate of interest depends on the demand and supply of loans]
The present seems the most proper place for discussing the circumstances
which determine the rate of interest. The interest of loans, being
really a question of exchange value, falls naturally into the present
division of our subject: and the two topics of Currency and Loans,
though in themselves distinct, are so intimately blended in the
phenomena of what is called the money market, that it is impossible to
understand the one without the other, and in many minds the two subjects
are mixed up in the most inextricable confusion.

In the preceding Book* we defined the relation in which interest stands
to profit. We found that the gross profit of capital might be
distinguished into three parts, which are respectively the remuneration
for risk, for trouble, and for the capital itself, and may be termed
insurance, wages of superintendence, and interest. After making
compensation for risk, that is, after covering the average losses to
which capital is exposed either by the general circumstances of society
or by the hazards of the particular employment, there remains a surplus,
which partly goes to repay the owner of the capital for his abstinence,
and partly the employer of it for his time and trouble. How much goes to
the one and how much to the other, is shown by the amount of the
remuneration which, when the two functions are separated, the owner of
capital can obtain from the employer for its use. This is evidently a
question of demand and supply. Nor have demand and supply any different
meaning or effect in this case from what they have in all others. The
rate of interest will be such as to equalize the demand for loans with
the supply of them. It will be such, that exactly as much as some people
are desirous to borrow at that rate, others shall be willing to lend. If
there is more offered than demanded, interest will fall; if more is
demanded than offered, it will rise; and in both cases, to the point at
which the equation of supply and demand is re-established.

Both the demand and supply of loans fluctuate more incessantly than any
other demand or supply whatsoever. The fluctuations in other things
Edition: current; Page: [648] depend on a limited number of influencing
circumstances; but the desire to borrow, and the willingness to lend,
are more or less influenced by every circumstance which affects the
state or prospects of industry or commerce, either generally or in any
of their branches. The rate of interest, therefore, on good security,
which alone we have here to consider (for interest in which
considerations of risk bear a part may swell to any amount) is seldom,
in the great centres of money transactions, precisely the same for two
days together; as is shown by the never-ceasing variations in the quoted
prices of the funds and other negotiable securities. Nevertheless, there
must be, as in other cases of value, some rate which (in the language of
Adam Smith and Ricardo) may be called the natural rate; some rate about
which the market rate oscillates, and to which it always tends to
return. This rate partly depends on the amount of accumulation going on
in the hands of persons who cannot themselves attend to the employment
of their savings, and partly on the comparative taste existing in the
community for the active pursuits of industry, or for the leisure, ease,
and independence of an annuitant.

§ 2. [Circumstances which determine the permanent demand and supply of
loans] To exclude casual fluctuations, we will suppose commerce to be in
a quiescent condition, no employment being unusually prosperous, and
none particularly distressed. In these circumstances, the more thriving
producers and traders have their capital fully employed, and many are
able to transact business to a considerably greater extent than they
have capital for. These are naturally borrowers: and the amount which
they desire to borrow, and can aobtain credita for, constitutes the
demand for loans on account of productive employment. To these must be
added the loans required by Government, and by landowners, or other
unproductive consumers who have good security to give. This constitutes
the mass of loans for which there is an habitual demand.

Now it is conceivable that there might exist, in the hands of persons
disinclined or disqualified for engaging personally in business, a mass
of capital equal to, and even exceeding, this demand. In that case there
would be an habitual excess of competition on the part of lenders, and
the rate of interest would bear a low proportion to the rate of profit.
Interest would be forced down to the point which would either tempt
borrowers to take a greater amount of loans than they had a reasonable
expectation of being able to employ in their business, or would so
discourage a portion of the lenders, as to make them either forbear to
accumulate, or endeavour to increase their income by engaging in
business on their own account, and incurring the risks, if not the
labours, of industrial employment.

Edition: current; Page: [649]
On the other hand, the capital owned by persons who prefer lending it at
interest, or whose avocations prevent them from personally
superintending its employment, may be short of the habitual demand for
loans. It may be in great part absorbed by the investments afforded by
the public debt and by mortgages, and the remainder may not be
sufficient to supply the wants of commerce. If so, the rate of interest
will be raised so high as in some way to re-establish the equilibrium.
When there is only a small difference between interest and profit, many
borrowers may no longer be willing to increase their responsibilities
and involve their credit for so small a remuneration: or some who would
otherwise have engaged in business, may prefer leisure, and become
lenders instead of borrowers: or others, under the inducement of high
interest and easy investment for their capital, may retire from business
earlier, and with smaller fortunes, than they otherwise would have done.
Or, lastly, there is another process by which, in England and other
commercial countries, a large portion of the requisite supply of loans
is obtained. Instead of its being afforded by persons not in business,
the affording it may itself become a business. A portion of the capital
employed in trade may be supplied by a class of professional money
lenders. These money lenders, however, must have more than a mere
interest; they must have the ordinary rate of profit on their capital,
risk and all other circumstances being allowed for. But it can never
answer to any one who borrows for the purposes of his business, to pay a
full profit for capital from which he will only derive a full profit:
and money-lending, as an employment, for the regular supply of trade,
cannot, therefore, be carried on except by persons who, in addition to
their own capital, can lend their credit, or, in other words, the
capital of other people: that is, bankers, and persons (such as
bill-brokers) who are virtually bankers, since they receive money in
deposit. A bank which lends its notes, lends capital which it borrows
from the community, and for which it pays no interest. A bank of deposit
lends capital which it collects from the community in small parcels;
sometimes without paying any interest, as is the case with the London
private bankers; and if, like the Scotch, the joint stock, and most of
the country banks, it does pay interest, it still pays much less than it
receives; for the depositors, who in any other way could mostly obtain
for such small balances no interest worth taking any trouble for, are
glad to receive even a little. Having this subsidiary resource, bankers
are enabled to obtain, by lending at interest, the ordinary rate of
profit on their own capital. In any other manner, money-lending could
not be carried on as a regular mode of business, except upon terms on
which none would consent to borrow but persons either counting on
extraordinary profits, or in urgent need: unproductive consumers who
have exceeded their means, or merchants in fear of bankruptcy. The
disposable capital Edition: current; Page: [650] deposited in banksb;
thatb represented by bank notesc; the capital of bankers themselves, and
that which their credit in any way in which they use it, enables them to
dispose of; thesec, together with the funds belonging to those who,
either from necessity or preference, live upon the interest of their
property, constitute the general loan fund of the country: and the
amount of this aggregate fund, when set against the habitual demands of
producers and dealers, and those of the Government and of unproductive
consumers, ddeterminesd the permanent or average rate of interest; which
must always be such as to adjust these two amounts to one another.* But
while the whole of this mass of lent capital takes effect upon the
permanent rate of interest, the fluctuations depend almost entirely upon
the portion which is in the hands of bankers; for it is that portion
almost exclusively, which, being lent for short times only, is
continually in the market seeking an investment. The capital of those
who live on the interest of their own fortunes, has generally sought and
found some fixed investment, such as the public funds, mortgages, or the
bonds of public companies, which investment, except under peculiar
temptations or necessities, is not changed.

§ 3. [Circumstances which determine the fluctuations] Fluctuations in
the rate of interest arise from variations either in the demand for
loans, or in the supply. The supply is liable to variation, though less
so than the demand. The willingness to lend is greater than usual at the
commencement of a period of speculation, and much less than usual during
the revulsion which follows. In speculative times, money-lenders as well
as other people are inclined to extend their business by stretching
their credit; they lend more than usual (just as other classes of
dealers and producers employ more than usual) of capital which does not
belong to them. Accordingly, these are the times when the rate of
interest is low; though for this too (as Edition: current; Page: [651]
we shall ahereaftera see) there are other causes. During the revulsion,
on the contrary, interest always rises inordinately, because, while
there is a most pressing need on the part of many persons to borrow,
there is a general disinclination to lend. This disinclination, when at
its extreme point, is called a panic. It occurs when a succession of
unexpected failures has created in the mercantile, and sometimes also in
the non-mercantile public, a general distrust in each other’s solvency;
disposing every one not only to refuse fresh credit, except on very
onerous terms, but to call in, if possible, all credit which he has
already given. Deposits are withdrawn from banks; notes are returned on
the issuers in exchange for specie; bankers raise their rate of
discount, and withhold their customary advances; merchants refuse to
renew mercantile bills. At such times the most calamitous consequences
were formerly experienced from the attempt of the law to prevent more
than a certain limited rate of interest from being given or taken.
Persons who could not borrow at five per cent, had to pay, not six or
seven, but ten or fifteen per cent, to compensate the lender for risking
the penalties of the law: or had to sell securities or goods for ready
money at a still greater sacrifice.b

cIn the intervals between commercial crises, there is usually a tendency
in the rate of interest to a progressive decline,c from the gradual
process of accumulation: which process, din the great commercial
countries, is sufficiently rapid to account for the almost periodical
recurrence of these fits of speculation; since, when a few years have
elapsed without a crisis, and no new and tempting channel for investment
has been opened in the meantime, there is always found to have occurred
in those few years so large an increase of capital seeking investment,
as to have lowered considerably the rate of interest, whether indicated
by the prices of securities or by the rate of discount on bills; and
this diminution of interest tempts the epossessore to incur hazards in
hopes of a more considerable return.

fThe rate of interest is, at times, affected more or less permanently by
circumstances, though not of frequent, yet of occasional occurrence,
which tend to alter the proportion between the class of
interest-receiving and that of profit-receiving capitalists. Two causes
of this description, operating in contrary ways, have manifested
themselves of late years, and are now producing considerable effects in
England. One is, the gold discoveries. The masses of the precious metals
which are constantly arriving from the Edition: current; Page: [652]
gold countries, are, it may safely be said, wholly added to the funds
that supply the loan market. So great an additional capital, not divided
between the two classes of capitalists, but aggregated bodily to the
capital of the interest-receiving class, disturbs the pre-existing ratio
between the two, and tends to depress interest relatively to profit.
Another circumstance of still more recent date, but tending to the
contrary effect, is the legalization of joint-stock associations with
limited liability. The shareholders in these associations, now so
rapidly multiplying, are drawn almost exclusively from the lending
class; from those who either left their disposable funds in deposit, to
be lent out by bankers, or invested them in public or private
securities, and received the interest. To the extent of their shares in
any of these companies (with the single exception of banking companies)
they have become traders on their own capital; they have ceased to be
lenders, and have even, in most cases, passed over to the class of
borrowers. Their subscriptions have been abstracted from the funds which
feed the loan market, and they themselves have become competitors for a
share of the remainder of those funds: of all which, the natural effect
is a rise of interest. And it would not be surprising if, for a
considerable time to come, the ordinary rate of interest in England
should bear a higher proportion to the common rate of mercantile profit,
than it has borne at any time since the influx of new gold set in.*f

The demand for loans varies much more largely than the supply, and
embraces longer cycles of years in its aberrations. A time of war, for
example, is a period of unusual drafts on the loan gmarketg. The
Government, at such times, generally incurs new loans, and as these
usually succeed each other rapidly as long as the war lasts, the general
rate of interest is kept higher in war than in peace, without reference
to the rate of profit, and productive industry is stinted of its usual
supplies. During hpart of the last iwar with Francei, the Government
could not Edition: current; Page: [653] borrow under six per cent, and
of course all other borrowers had to pay at least as much. Nor does the
influence of these loans altogether cease when the Government ceases to
contract others; for those already contracted continue to afford an
investment for a greatly increased amount of the disposable capital of
the country, which if the national debt were paid off, would be added to
the mass of capital seeking investment, and (independently of temporary
disturbance) could not but, to some extent, permanently lower the rate
of interest.

The same effect on interest which is produced by Government loans for
war expenditure, is produced by the sudden opening of any new and
generally attractive mode of permanent investment. The only instance of
the kind in recent history on a scale comparable to that of the war
loans, is the absorption of capital in the construction of railways.
This capital must have been principally drawn from the deposits in
banks, or from savings which would have gone into deposit, and which
were destined to be ultimately employed in buying securities from
persons who would have employed the purchase money in discounts or other
loans at interest: in either case, it was a draft on the general loan
fund. It is, in fact, evident, that unless savings were made expressly
to be employed in railway adventure, the amount thus employed must have
been derived either from the actual capital of persons in business, or
from capital which would have been lent to persons in business. In the
first case, the subtraction, by crippling their means, obliges them to
be larger borrowers; in the second, it leaves less for them to borrow;
in either case it equally tends to raise the rate of interest.

§ 4. [The rate of interesta, how far, and in what sense connected with
the value of moneya] bI have, thus far, considered loans, and the rate
of interest, as a matter which concerns capital in general, in direct
opposition to the popular notion, according to which it only concerns
money. In loans, as in all other money transactions, I have regarded the
money which Edition: current; Page: [654] passes, only as the medium,
and commodities as the thing really transferred—the real subject of the
transaction. And this is, in the main, correct: because the purpose for
which, in the ordinary course of affairs, money is borrowed, is to
acquire a purchasing power over commodities. In an industrious and
commercial country, the ulterior intention commonly is, to employ the
commodities as capital: but even in the case of loans for unproductive
consumption, as those of spendthrifts, or of the Government, the amount
borrowed is taken from a previous accumulation, which would otherwise
have been lent to carry on productive industry; it is, therefore, so
much subtracted from what may correctly be called the amount of loanable
capital.

There is, however, a not unfrequent case, in which the purpose of the
borrower is different from what I have here supposed. He may borrow
money, neither to employ it as capital nor to spend it unproductively,
but to pay a previous debt. In this case, what he wants is not
purchasing power, but legal tender, or something which a creditor will
accept as equivalent to it. His need is specifically for money, not for
commodities or capital. It is the demand arising from this cause, which
produces almost all the great and sudden variations of the rate of
interest. Such a demand forms one of the earliest features of a
commercial crisis. At such a period, many persons in business who have
contracted engagements, have been prevented by a change of circumstances
from obtaining in time the means on which they calculated for fulfilling
them. These means they must obtain at any sacrifice, or submit to
bankruptcy; and what they must have is money. Other capital, however
much of it they may possess, cannot answer the purpose unless money can
first be obtained for it; while, on the Edition: current; Page: [655]
contrary, without any increase of the capital of the country, a mere
increase of circulating instruments of credit (be they of as little
worth for any other purpose as the box of one pound notes discovered in
the vaults of the Bank of England during the panic of 1825) will
effectually serve their turn if only they are allowed to make use of it.
An increased issue of notes, in the form of loans, is all that is
required to satisfy the demand, and put an end to the accompanying
panic. But although, in this case, it is not capital, or purchasing
power, that the borrower needs, but money as money, it is not only money
that is transferred to him. The money carries its purchasing power, with
it wherever it goes; and money thrown into the loan market really does,
through its purchasing power, turn over an increased portion of the
capital of the country into the direction of loans. Though money alone
was wanted, capital passes; and it may still be said with truth that it
is by an addition to lonable capital that the rise of the rate of
interest is met and corrected.

Independently of this, however, there is a real relation, which it is
indispensable to recognise, between loans and money. Loanable capital is
all of it in the form of money. Capital destined directly for production
exists in many forms; but capital destined for lending exists normally
in that form alone. Owing to this circumstance, we should naturally
expect that among the causes which affect more or less the rate of
interest, would be found not only causes which act through capital, but
some causes which act, directly at least, only through money.

The rate of interest bears no necessary relation to the quantity or
value of the money in circulation. The permanent amount of the
circulating medium, whether great or small, affects only prices; not the
rate of interest. A depreciation of the currency, when it has become an
accomplished fact, affects the rate of interest in no manner whatever.
It diminishes indeed the power of money to buy commodities, but not the
power of money to buy money. If a hundred pounds will buy a perpetual
annuity of four pounds a year, a depreciation which makes the hundred
pounds worth only half as much as before, has precisely the same effect
on the four pounds, and cannot therefore alter the relation between the
two. The greater or smaller number of counters which must be used to
express a given amount of real wealth, makes no difference in the
position or interests of lenders or borrowers, and therefore makes no
difference in the demand and supply of loans. There is the same amount
of real capital lent and borrowed; and if the capital in the hands of
lenders is represented by a greater number of pounds sterling, the same
greater number of pounds sterling will, in consequence of the rise of
prices, be now required for the purposes to which the borrowers intend
to apply them.

But though the greater or less quantity of money makes in itself no
Edition: current; Page: [656] difference in the rate of interest, a
change from a less quantity to a greater, or from a greater to a less,
may and does make a difference in it.

Suppose money to be in process of depreciation by means of an
inconvertible currency, issued by a government in payment of its
expenses. This fact will in no way diminish the demand for real capital
on loan; but it will diminish the real capital loanable, because, this
existing only in the form of money, the increase of quantity depreciates
it. Estimated in capital, the amount offered is less, while the amount
required is the same as before. Estimated in currency, the amount
offered is only the same as before, while the amount required, owing to
the rise of prices, is greater. Either way, the rate of interest must
rise. So that in this case increase of currency really affects the rate
of interest, but in the contrary way to that which is generally
supposed; by raising, not by lowering it.

The reverse will happen as the effect of calling in, or diminishing in
quantity, a depreciated currency. The money in the hands of lenders, in
common with all other money, will be enhanced in value, that is, there
will be a greater amount of real capital seeking borrowers; while the
real capital wanted by borrowers will be only the same as before, and
the money amount less: the rate of interest, therefore, will tend to
fall.

We thus see that depreciation, merely as such, while in process of
taking place, tends to raise the rate of interest: and the expectation
of further depreciation adds to this effect; because lenders who expect
that their interest will be paid and the principal perhaps redeemed, in
a less valuable currency than they lent, of course require a rate of
interest sufficient to cover this contingent loss.

But this effect is more than counteracted by a contrary one, when the
additional money is thrown into circulation not by purchases but by
loans. In England, and in most other commercial countries, the paper
currency in common use, being a currency provided by bankers, is all
issued in the way of loans, except the part employed in the purchase of
gold and silver. The same operation, therefore, which adds to the
currency also adds to the loans: the whole increase of currency in the
first instance swells the loan market. Considered as an addition to
loans it tends to lower interest, more than in its character of
depreciation it tends to raise it; for the former effect depends on the
ratio which the new money bears to the money lent, while the latter
depends on its ratio to all the money in circulation. An increase,
therefore, of currency issued by banks, tends, while the process
continues, to bring down or to keep down the rate of interest. A similar
effect is produced by the increase of money arising from the gold
discoveries; almost the whole of which, as already noticed, is, when
brought to Europe, added to the deposits in banks, and consequently to
the amount of loans; and when drawn out and invested in securities,
liberates an Edition: current; Page: [657] equivalent amount of other
loanable capital. The newly-arrived gold can only get itself invested,
in any given state of business, by lowering the rate of interest; and as
long as the influx continues, it cannot fail to keep interest lower
than, all other circumstances being supposed the same, would otherwise
have been the case.

As the introduction of additional gold and silver, which goes into the
loan market, tends to keep down the rate of interest, so any
considerable abstraction of them from the country invariably raises it;
even when occurring in the course of trade, as in paying for the extra
importations caused by a bad harvest, or for the high-priced cotton
whichc, under the influence of the American civil war, wasc imported
from so many parts of the world. The money required for these payments
is taken in the first instance from the deposits in the hands of
bankers, and to that extent starves the fund that supplies the loan
market.

The rate of interest, then, depends essentially and permanently on the
comparative amount of real capital offered and demanded in the way of
loan; but is subject to temporary disturbances of various sorts, from
increase and diminution of the circulating medium; which derangements
are somewhat intricate, and sometimes in direct opposition to first
appearances. All these distinctions are veiled over and confounded, by
the unfortunate misapplication of language which designates the rate of
interest by a phrase (“the value of money”) which properly expresses the
purchasing power of the circulating medium. The public, even mercantile,
habitually fancies that ease in the money market, that is, facility of
borrowing at low interest, is proportional to the quantity of money in
circulation.b Not only, therefore, are bank notes supposed to produce
effects as currency, which they only produce as loans, but attention is
habitually diverted from effects similar in kind and much greater in
degree, when produced by an action on loans which does not happen to be
accompanied by any action on the currency.

For example, in considering the effect produced by the proceedings of
banks in encouraging the excesses of speculation, an immense effect is
usually attributed to their issues of notes, but until of late hardly
any attention was paid to the management of their deposits; though
nothing is more certain than that their imprudent extensions of credit
take place more frequently by means of their deposits than of their
issues. “There is no doubt,” says Mr. Tooke,* “that banks, whether
private or joint stock, may, if imprudently conducted, minister to an
undue extension of credit for the purpose of speculations, whether in
commodities, or in overtrading in exports or imports, or in building or
mining operations, and that they have Edition: current; Page: [658] so
ministered not unfrequently, and in some cases to an extent ruinous to
themselves, and without ultimate benefit to the parties to whose views
their resources were made subservient.” But, “supposing all the deposits
received by a banker to be in coin, is he not, just as much as the
issuing banker, exposed to the importunity of customers, whom it may be
impolitic to refuse, for loans or discounts, or to be tempted by a high
interest? and may he not be induced to encroach so much upon his
deposits as to leave him, under not improbable circumstances, unable to
meet the demands of his depositors? In what respect, indeed, would the
case of a banker in a perfectly metallic circulation, differ from that
of a London banker at the present day? He is not a creator of money, he
cannot avail himself of his privilege as an issuer in aid of his other
business, and yet there have been lamentable instances of London bankers
issuing money in excess.”

In the discussions, too, which have been for so many years carried on
respecting the operations of the Bank of England, and the effects
produced by those operations on the state of credit, though for nearly
half a century there never has been a commercial crisis which the Bank
has not been strenuously accused either of producing or of aggravating,
it has been almost universally assumed that the influence of its acts
was felt only through the amount of its notes in circulation, and that
if it could be prevented from exercising any discretion as to that one
feature in its position, it would no longer have any power liable to
abuse. This at least is an error which, after the experience of the year
1847, we may hope has been committed for the last time. During that year
the hands of the bank were absolutely tied, in its character of a bank
of issue; but through its operations as a bank of deposit it exercised
as great an influence, or apparent influence, on the rate of interest
and the state of credit, as at any former period; it was exposed to as
vehement accusations of abusing that influence; and a crisis occurred,
such as few that preceded it had equalled, and none perhaps surpassed,
in intensity.

§ 5. [The rate of interest determines the price of land and of
securities] Before quitting the general subject of this chapter, I will
make the obvious remark, that the rate of interest determines the value
and price of all those saleable articles which are desired and bought,
not for themselves, but for the income which they are capable of
yielding. The public funds, shares in joint-stock companies, and all
descriptions of securities, are at a high price in proportion as the
rate of interest is low. They are sold at the price which will give the
market rate of interest on the purchase money, with allowance for all
differences in the risk incurred, or in any circumstance of convenience.
Exchequer bills, for example, usually sell at a higher price than
consols, proportionally to the interest which they yield; because,
Edition: current; Page: [659] though the security is the same, yet the
former being annually paid off at par aunless renewed by the holdera,
the purchaser (unless obliged to sell in a moment of general emergency),
is in no danger of losing anything by the resale, except the premium he
may have paid.

The price of land, mines, and all other fixed sources of income, depends
in like manner on the rate of interest. Land usually sells at a higher
price, in proportion to the income afforded by it, than the public
funds, not only because it is thought, even in this country, to be
somewhat more secure, but because ideas of power and dignity are
associated with its possession. But these differences are constant, or
nearly so; and in the variations of price, land follows, cæteris
paribus, the permanent (though of course not the daily) variations of
the rate of interest. When interest is low, land will naturally be dear;
when interest is high, land will be cheap. The last blongb war presented
a striking exception to this rule, since the price of land as well as
the rate of interest was then remarkably high. For this, however, there
was a special cause. The continuance of a very high average price of
corn for many years, had raised the rent of land even more than in
proportion to the rise of interest and fall of the selling price of
fixed incomes. Had it not been for this accident, chiefly dependent on
the seasons, land must have sustained as great a depreciation in value
as the public funds: which it probably would do, were a csimilarc war to
break out hereafter; to the signal disappointment of those landlords and
farmers who, generalizing from the casual circumstances of a remarkable
period, so long persuaded themselves that a state of war was peculiarly
advantageous, and a state of peace disadvantageous, to what they chose
to call the interests of agriculture.

Edition: current; Page: [660]


CHAPTER XXIV: Of the Regulation of a Convertible Paper Currency

§ 1. [Two contrary theories respecting the influence of bank issues] The
frequent recurrence during the last half century of the painful series
of phenomena called a commercial crisis, has directed much of the
attention both of economists and of practical politicians to the
contriving of expedients for averting, or at the least, mitigating its
evils. And the habit which grew up during the era of the Bank
restriction, of ascribing all alternations of high and low apricesa to
the issues of banks, has caused inquirers in general to fix their hopes
of success in moderating those vicissitudes, upon schemes for the
regulation of bank notes. A scheme of this nature, after having obtained
the sanction of high authorities, so far established itself in the
public mind, as to be, with general approbation, converted into a law,
at the brenewal of the Charter of the Bank of England cin 1844c: and the
regulation is still in force, though with a great abatement of its
popularity, and with its prestige impaired by dthree temporary
suspensionsd, on the responsibility of the executive, ethe earliest
littlee more than three years after its enactment. It is proper that the
merits of this plan for the regulation of a convertible bank note
currency should be here considered. Before touching upon the practical
provisions of Sir Robert Peel’s Act of 1844, I shall briefly state the
nature, and examine the grounds, of the theory on which it is founded.

It is believed by many, that banks of issue universally, or the Bank of
England in particular, have a power of throwing their notes into
circulation, and thereby raising prices, arbitrarily; that this power is
only limited by the degree of moderation with which they think fit to
exercise it; that when they increase their issues beyond the usual
amount, the rise of prices, thus produced, generates a spirit of
speculation in commodities, which Edition: current; Page: [661] carries
prices still higher, and ultimately causes a reaction and recoil,
amounting in extreme cases to a commercial crisis; and that every such
crisis which has occurred in this country within mercantile memory, has
been either originally produced by this cause, or greatly aggravated by
it. To this extreme length the currency theory has not been carried by
the eminent political economists who have given to a more moderate form
of the same theory the sanction of their names. But I have not
overstated the extravagance of the popular version; which is a
remarkable instance to what lengths a favourite theory will hurry, not
the closet students whose competency in such questions is often treated
with so much contempt, but men of the world and of business, who pique
themselves on the practical knowledge which they have at least had ample
opportunities of acquiring. Not only has this fixed idea of the currency
as the prime agent in the fluctuations of price, made them shut their
eyes to the multitude of circumstances which, by influencing the
expectation of supply, are the true causes of almost all speculations,
and of almost all fluctuations of price; but in order to bring about the
chronological agreement required by their theory, between the variations
of bank issues and those of prices, they have played such fantastic
tricks with facts and dates as would be thought incredible, if an
eminent practical authority had not taken the trouble of meeting them,
on the ground of mere history, with an elaborate fexposure. I refer, as
all conversant with the subject must be aware, to Mr. Tooke’s History of
Prices. The result of Mr. Tooke’s investigations was thus stated by
himself, in his examination before the Commons’ Committee on the Bank
Charter question in 1832; and the evidences of it stand recorded in his
book: “In point of fact, and historically, as far as my researches have
gone, in every signal instance of a rise or fall of prices, the rise or
fall has preceded, and therefore could not be the effect of, an
enlargement or contraction of the bank circulation.”[*]

The extravagance of the currency theorists, in attributing almost every
rise or fall of prices to an enlargement or contraction of the issues of
bank notes, has raised up, by reaction, a theory the extreme opposite of
the former, of which, in scientific discussion, the most prominent
representatives are Mr. Tooke and Mr. Fullarton. This counter-theory
denies to bank notes, so long as their convertibility is maintained, any
power whatever of raising prices, and to banks any power of increasing
their circulation, except as a consequence of, and in proportion to, an
increase of the business to be done. This last statement is supported by
the unanimous assurances of all the country bankers who have been
examined before successive Parliamentary Committees on the subject. They
all bear testimony Edition: current; Page: [662] that (in the words of
Mr. Fullarton*) “the amount of their issues is exclusively regulated by
the extent of local dealings and expenditure in their respective
districts, fluctuating with the fluctuations of production and price,
and that they neither can increase their issues beyond the limits which
the range of such dealings and expenditure prescribes, without the
certainty of having their notes immediately returned to them, nor
diminish them, but at an almost equal certainty of the vacancy being
filled up from some other source.” From these premises it is argued by
Mr. Tooke and Mr. Fullarton, that bank issues, since they cannot be
increased in amount unless there be an increased demand, cannot possibly
raise prices; cannot encourage speculation, nor occasion a commercial
crisis; and that the attempt to guard against that evil by an artificial
management of the issue of notes, is of no effect for the intended
purpose, and liable to produce other consequences extremely calamitous.

§ 2. [Examination of each theory] As much of this doctrine as rests upon
testimony, and not upon inference, appears to me incontrovertible. I
give complete credence to the assertion of the country bankers, very
clearly and correctly condensed into a small compass in the sentence
just quoted from Mr. Fullarton. I am convinced that they cannot possibly
increase their issue of notes in any other circumstances than those
which are there stated. I believe, also, that the theory, grounded by
Mr. Fullarton upon this fact, contains a large portion of truth, and is
far nearer to being the expression of the whole truth than any form
whatever of the currency theory.

There are two states of the markets: one which may be termed the
quiescent state, the other the expectant, or speculative state. The
first is that in which there is nothing tending to engender in any
considerable portion of the mercantile public a desire to extend their
operations. The producers produce and the dealers purchase only their
usual stocks, having no expectation of a more than usually rapid vent
for them. Each person transacts his ordinary amount of business, and no
more; or increases it only in correspondence with the increase of his
capital or aconnexiona, or with the gradual growth of the demand for his
commodity, occasioned by the public prosperity. Not meditating any
unusual extension of their own operations, producers and dealers do not
need more than the usual accommodation from bankers and other money
lenders; and as it is only by extending their loans that bankers
increase their issues, none but a momentary augmentation of issues is in
these circumstances possible. If at a certain time of the year a portion
of the public have larger payments to make than at other times, or if an
individual, under some peculiar exigency, requires an extra advance,
they may apply for more bank notes, Edition: current; Page: [663] and
obtain them; but the notes will no more remain in circulation, than the
extra quantity of Bank of England notes which are issued once in every
three months in payment of the dividends. The person to whom, after
being borrowed, the notes are paid away, has no extra payments to make,
and no peculiar exigency, and he keeps them by him unused, or sends them
into deposit, or repays with them a previous advance made to him by some
banker: in any case he does not buy commodities with them, since by the
supposition there is nothing to induce him to lay in a larger stock of
commodities than before. bEven if we suppose, as we may do, that bankers
create an artificial increase of the demand for loans by offering them
below the market rate of interest, the notes they issue will not remain
in circulation; for when the borrower, having completed the transaction
for which he availed himself of them, has paid them away, the creditor
or dealer who receives them, having no demand for the immediate use of
an extra quantity of notes, sends them into deposit.b In this case,
therefore, there can be no addition, at the discretion of bankers, to
the general circulating medium: any increase of their issues either
comes back to them, or remains idle in the hands of the public, and no
rise takes place in prices.

But there is another state of the markets, strikingly contrasted with
the preceding, and to this state it is not so obvious that the theory of
Mr. Tooke and Mr. Fullarton is applicable; namely, when an impression
prevails, whether well founded or groundless, that the supply of one or
more great articles of commerce is likely to fall short of the ordinary
consumption. In such circumstances all persons connected with those
commodities desire to extend their operations. The producers or
importers desire to produce or import a larger quantity, speculators
desire to lay in a stock in order to profit by the expected rise of
price, and holders of the commodity desire additional advances to enable
them to continue holding. All these classes are disposed to make a more
than ordinary use of their credit, and to this desire it is not denied
that bankers very often unduly administer. Effects of the same kind may
be produced by anything which, exciting more than usual hopes of profit,
gives increased briskness to business: for example, a sudden foreign
demand for commodities on a large scale, or the expectation of it; such
as occurred on the opening of Spanish America to English trade, and has
occurred on various occasions in the trade with the United States. Such
occurrences produce a tendency to a rise of price in exportable
articles, and generate speculations, sometimes of a reasonable, and (as
long as a large proportion of men in business prefer excitement to
safety) frequently of an irrational or immoderate character. In such
cases there is a desire in the mercantile classes, or in some portion of
them, to employ their credit, in a more than usual degree, as a power of
purchasing. This is a state of business which, when pushed to an extreme
length, brings Edition: current; Page: [664] on the revulsion called a
commercial crisis; and it is a known fact that such periods of
speculation hardly ever pass off without having been attended, during
some part of their progress, by a considerable increase of bank notes.

To this, however, it is replied by Mr. Tooke and Mr. Fullarton, that the
increase of the circulation always follows instead of preceding the rise
of prices, and is not its cause, but its effect. That in the first
place, the speculative purchases by which prices are raised, are not
effected by bank notes but by cheques, or still more commonly on a
simple book credit: and secondly, even if they were made with bank notes
borrowed for that express purpose from bankers, the notes, after being
used for that purpose, would, if not wanted for current transactions, be
returned into deposit by the persons receiving them. In this I fully
concur, and I regard it as proved, both scientifically and historically,
that during the ascending period of speculation, and as long as it is
confined to transactions between dealers, the issues of bank notes are
seldom materially increased, nor contribute anything to the speculative
rise of prices. It seems to me, however, that this can no longer be
affirmed when speculation has proceeded so far as to reach the
producers. Speculative orders given by merchants to manufacturers induce
them to extend their operations, and to become applicants to bankers for
increased advances, which if made in notes, are not paid away to persons
who return them into deposit, but are partially expended in paying
wages, and pass into the various channels of retail trade, where they
become directly effective in producing a further rise of prices. I
cannot but think that this employment of bank notes must have been
powerfully operative on prices at the time when notes of one and two
pounds value were permitted by law. Admitting, however, that the
prohibition of notes below five pounds has now rendered this part of
their operation comparatively insignificant by greatly limiting their
applicability to the payment of wages, there is another form of their
instrumentality which comes into play in the clatterc stages of
speculation, and which forms the principal argument of the more moderate
supporters of the currency theory. Though advances by bankers are seldom
demanded for the purpose of buying on speculation, they are largely
demanded by unsuccessful speculators for the purpose of holding on; and
the competition of these speculators for a share of the loanable
capital, makes even those who have not speculated, more dependent than
before on bankers for the advances they require. Between the ascending
period of speculation and the revulsion, there is an interval extending
to weeks and sometimes months, of struggling against a fall. The tide
having shown signs of turning, the speculative holders are unwilling to
sell in a falling market, and in the meantime they require funds to
Edition: current; Page: [665] enable them to fulfil even their ordinary
engagements. It is this stage that is ordinarily marked by a
considerable increase in the amount of the banknote circulation. That
such an increase does usually take place, is denied by no one. And I
think it must be admitted that this increase tends to prolong the
duration of the speculations; that it enables the speculative prices to
be kept up for some time after they would otherwise have collapsed; and
therefore prolongs and increases the drain of the precious metals for
exportation, which is a leading feature of this stage in the progress of
a commercial crisis: the continuance of which drain at last endangering
the power of the banks to fulfil their engagement of paying their notes
on demand, they are compelled to contract their credit more suddenly and
severely than would have been necessary if they had been prevented from
propping up speculation by increased advances, after the time when the
recoil had become inevitable.

§ 3. [Reasons for thinking that the Currency Act of 1844 produces a part
of the beneficial effect intended by it] To prevent this retardation of
the recoil, and ultimate aggravation of its severity, is the object of
the scheme for regulating the currency, of which aLord Overstonea, Mr.
Norman, and Colonel Torrens, were the first promulgators, and which has,
in a slightly modified form, been enacted into law.*

According to the scheme in its original purity, the issue of promissory
Edition: current; Page: [666] notes for circulation was to be confined
to one body. In the form adopted by Parliament, all existing issuers
bwereb permitted to retain this privilege, but none cwerec to be
dhereafterd admitted to it, even in the place of those who emighte
discontinue their issues: and, for all except the Bank of England, a
maximum of issues fwasf prescribed, on a scale intentionally low. To the
Bank of England no maximum gwasg fixed for the aggregate amount of its
notes, but only for the portion hissued on securities, or in other
words, on loan. These iwerei never to exceed a certain limit, fixed jin
the first instancej at fourteen millions.* All issues beyond that amount
must be in exchange for bullion; of which the Bank is bound to purchase,
at a trifle below the Mint valuation, any quantity which is offered to
it, giving its notes in exchange. In regard, therefore, to any issue of
notes beyond the limit of fourteen millions, the Bank is purely passive,
having no function but the compulsory one of giving its notes for gold
at 3l. 17s. 9d., and gold for its notes at 3l. 17s. 10½d., whenever and
by whomsoever it is called upon to do so.

The object for which this mechanism is intended is, that the bank-note
currency may vary in its amount at the exact times, and in the exact
degree, in which a purely metallic currency would vary. kAnd thek
precious metals being lthe commodity mthat has hitherto approachedm
nearest to that invariability in all the circumstances influencing
value, which fits a commodity for being adopted as a medium of exchange,
it nseems to be thought that the excellence of the Act of 1844 is fully
made out, if under its operation the issues conform in all their
variations of quantity, and therefore, as is inferred, of value, to the
variations which would take place in a currency wholly metallic.

Now, all reasonable opponents of the Act, in common with its supporters,
Edition: current; Page: [667] acknowledge as an essential requisite of
any substitute for the precious metals, that it should conform exactly
in its permanent value to a metallic standard. And they say, that so
long as it is convertible into specie on demand, it does and must so
conform. But when the value of a metallic or of any other currency is
spoken of, there are two points to be considered; the permanent or
average value, and the fluctuations. It is to the permanent value of a
metallic currency, that the value of a paper currency ought to conform.
But there is no obvious reason why it should be required to conform to
the fluctuations too. The only object of its conforming at all, is
steadiness of value; and with respect to fluctuations the sole thing
desirable is that they should be the smallest possible. Now the
fluctuations in the value of the currency are determined, not by its
quantity, whether it consist of gold or of paper, but by the expansions
and contractions of credit. To discover, therefore, what currency will
conform the most nearly to the opermanento value of the precious metals,
we must find under what currency the variations in credit are least
frequent and least extreme. Now, whether this object is best attained by
a metallic currency (and therefore by a paper currency exactly
conforming in quantity to it) is precisely the question to be decided.
If it should prove that a paper currency which follows all the
fluctuations in quantity of a metallic, leads to more violent revulsions
of credit than one which is not held to this rigid conformity, it will
follow that the currency which agrees most exactly in quantity with a
metallic currency is not that which adheres closest to its value; that
is to say, its permanent value, with which alone agreement is desirable.

Whether this is really the case or not we will now inquire. And first,
let us consider whether the Actn effects the practical object chiefly
relied on in its defence by the more sober of its advocates, that of
arresting speculative extensions of credit at an earlier period, with a
less drain of gold, and consequently by a milder and more gradual
process. I think it must be admitted that to a certain degree it is
successful in this object.

I am aware of what may be urged, and reasonably urged, in opposition to
this opinion. It pmayp be said, that when the time arrives at which the
banks are pressed for increased advances to enable speculators to fulfil
their engagements, a limitation of the issue of notes will not prevent
the banks, if otherwise willing, from making these advances; that they
have still their deposits as a source from which loans may be made
beyond the point which is consistent with prudence as bankers; and that
even if they refused to do so, the only effect would be, that the
deposits themselves would be drawn out to supply the wants of the
depositors; which would be just as much an addition to the bank notes
and coin in the hands of the Edition: current; Page: [668] public, as if
the notes themselves were increased. This is true, and is a sufficient
anwer to those who think that the advances of banks to prop up failing
speculations are objectionable chiefly as an increase of the currency.
But the mode in which they are really objectionable, is as an extension
of credit. If, instead of qincreasing their discounts, the banks allow
their deposits to be drawn outq, there is the same increase of currency
(for a short time at least), but there is not an increase of loansr, at
the time when there ought to be a diminution. If they do increase their
discounts, not by means of notes, but at the expense of the deposits
alone, their deposits (properly so called) are definite and exhaustible,
while notes may be increased to any amount, or, after being returned,
may be re-issued without limit. It is true that a bank, if willing to
add indefinitely to its liabilities, has the power of making its nominal
deposits as unlimited a fund as its issues could be; it has only to make
its advances in a book credit, which is creating deposits out of its own
liabilities, the money for which it has made itself responsible becoming
a deposit in its hands, to be drawn against by cheques; and the cheques
when drawn may be liquidated (either at the same bank or at the clearing
house) without the aid of notes, by a mere transfer of credit from one
account to another. I apprehend it is chiefly in this way that undue
extensions of credit, in periods of speculation, are commonly made. But
the banks are not likely to persist in this course when the tide begins
to turn. It is not when their deposits have already begun to flow out,
that they are likely to create deposit accounts which represent, instead
of funds placed in their hands, fresh liabilities of their own. But
experience proves that extension of credit, when in the form of notes,
goes on long after the recoil from over-speculation has commenced. When
this mode of resisting the revulsion is made impossible, and deposits
and book credits are left as the only sources from which undue advances
can be made, the rate of interest is not so often, or so long, prevented
from rising, afterr the difficulties consequent on excess of speculation
begin to be felt. sOn the contrary, the necessity which the banks feel
of diminishing their advances to maintain their solvency, when they find
their deposits flowing out, and cannot supply the vacant place by their
own notes, accelerates the rise of the rate of interest.s Speculative
holders are tthereforet obliged to submit earlier to that loss by
resale, which could not have been prevented from coming on them at last:
the recoil of prices and collapse of general credit take place sooner.

Edition: current; Page: [669]
To appreciate the ueffectsu which this acceleration of the crisis has in
mitigating its intensity, let us advert more particularly to the nature
and effects of that leading feature in the period just preceding the
collapse, the drain of gold. A rise of prices produced by a speculative
extension of credit, even when bank notes have not been the instrument,
is not the less effectual (if it lasts long enough) in turning the
exchanges: and when the exchanges have turned from this cause, they can
only be turned back, and the drain of gold stopped, either by a fall of
prices or by a rise of the rate of interest. A fall of prices will stop
it by removing the cause which produced it, and by rendering goods a
more advantageous remittance than gold, even for paying debts already
due. A rise of the rate of interest, and vconsequent fallv of the prices
of securities, will accomplish the purpose still more rapidly, by
inducing foreigners, instead of taking away the gold which is due to
them, to leave it for investment within the country, and even send gold
into the country to take advantage of the increased rate of interest. Of
this last mode of stopping a drain of gold, the year 1847 afforded
signal examples. But until one of these two things takes place—until
either prices fall, or the rate of interest rises—nothing can possibly
arrest, or even moderate, the efflux of gold. Now, neither will prices
fall nor interest rise, so long as the unduly expanded credit is upheld
by the continued advances of bankers. It is well known that when a drain
of gold has set in, even if bank notes have not increased in quantity,
it is upon them that the contraction first falls, the gold wanted for
exportation being always obtained from the Bank of England in exchange
for its notes. But under the system which preceded 1844, the Bank of
England, being subjected, in common with other banks, to the
importunities for fresh advances which are characteristic of such a
time, could, and often did, immediately re-issue the notes which had
been returned to it in exchange for bullion. It is a great error,
certainly, to suppose that the mischief of this re-issue chiefly
consisted in preventing a contraction of the currency. It was, however,
quite as mischievous as it has ever been supposed to be. As long as it
lasted, the efflux of gold could not cease, since neither would prices
fall nor interest rise while these advances continued. Prices, having
risen without any increase of bank notes, could well have fallen without
a diminution of them; but having risen in consequence of an extension of
credit, they could not fall without a contraction of it. As long,
therefore, as the Bank of England and the other banks persevered in this
course, so long gold continued to flow out, until so little was left
that the Bank of England, being in danger of suspension of payments, was
compelled at last to contract its discounts wso greatly and suddenly as
to produce a Edition: current; Page: [670] much more extreme variation
in the rate of interest, inflict much greater loss and distress on
individuals, and destroy a much greater amount of the ordinary credit of
the country, than any real necessity required.

I acknowledge, (and the experience of 1847 has proved xto those who
overlooked it before,) that the mischief now described, may be wrought,
and in large measure, by the Bank of England, through its deposits
alone. It may continue or even increase its discounts and advances, when
it ought to contract them: with the ultimate effect of making the
contraction much more severe and sudden than necessary. I cannot but
think, however, that banks which commit this error with their deposits,
would commit it still more if they were at liberty to make increased
loans with their issues as well as their deposits. I am compelled to
think that the being restricted from increasing their issues, is a real
impediment to their making those advances which arrest the tide at its
turn, and make it rush like a torrent afterwardsy: andy when the Act is
blamed for interposing obstacles at a time when not obstacles but
facilities are needed, it must in justice receive credit for interposing
them when they are an acknowledged benefit. In this particular,
therefore, I think it cannot be denied, that the new system is a real
improvement upon the old.

§ 4. [But the Currency Act produces mischiefs more than equivalent] But
ahowever this may be, it seems to me certaina that these advantages,
whatever value may be put on them, are purchased by still greater
disadvantages.

In the first place, a large extension of credit by bankers, though most
hurtful when, credit being already in an inflated state, it can only
serve to Edition: current; Page: [671] retard and aggravate the
collapse, is most salutary when the collapse has come, and when credit
instead of being in excess is in distressing deficiency, and increased
advances by bankers, instead of being an addition to the ordinary amount
of floating credit, serve to replace a mass of other credit which has
been suddenly destroyed. Antecedently to 1844, if the Bank of England
occasionally aggravated the severity of a commercial revulsion by
rendering the collapse of credit more tardy and bhenceb more violent
than necessary, it in return rendered invaluable services during the
revulsion itself, by coming forward with advances to support solvent
firms, at a time when all other paper and almost all mercantile credit
had become comparatively valueless. This service was eminently
conspicuous in the crisis of 1825-6, the severest probably ever
experienced; during which the Bank increased what is called its
circulation by many millions, in advances to those mercantile firms of
whose ultimate solvency it felt no doubt; advances which if it had been
obliged to withhold, the severity of the crisis would have been cstillc
greater than it was. If the Bank, it is justly remarked by Mr.
Fullarton,* complies with such applications, “it must comply with them
by an issue of notes, for notes constitute the only instrumentality
through which the Bank is in the practice of lending its credit. But
those notes are not intended to circulate, nor do they circulate. There
is no more demand for circulation than there was before. On the
contrary, the rapid decline of prices which the case in supposition
presumes, would necessarily contract the demand for circulation. The
notes would either be returned to the Bank of England, as fast as they
were issued, in the shape of deposits, or would be locked up in the
drawers of the private London bankers, or distributed by them to their
correspondents in the country, or intercepted by other capitalists, who,
during the fervour of the previous excitement, had contracted
liabilities which they might be imperfectly prepared on the sudden to
encounter. In such emergencies, every man connected with business, who
has been trading on other means than his own, is placed on the
defensive, and his whole object is to make himself as strong as
possible, an object which cannot be more effectually answered than by
keeping by him as large a reserve as possible in paper which the law has
made a legal tender. The notes themselves never find their way into the
produce market; and if they at all contribute to retard” (or, as I
should rather say, to moderate) “the fall of prices, it is not by
promoting in the slightest degree the effective demand for commodities,
not by enabling consumers to buy more largely for consumption, and so
giving briskness to commerce, but by a process dexactlyd the reverse, by
Edition: current; Page: [672] enabling the holders of commodities to
hold on, by obstructing traffic and repressing consumption.”

The opportune relief thus afforded to credit, during the excessive
contraction which succeeds to an undue expansion, is consistent with the
principle of the new system; for an extraordinary contraction of credit,
and fall of prices, inevitably draw gold into the country, and the
principle of the system is that the bank-note currency shall be
permitted, and even compelled, to enlarge itself, in all cases in which
a metallic currency would do the same. But, what the principle of the
law would encourage, its provisions in this instance preclude, by not
suffering the increased issues to take place until the gold has actually
arrived: which is never until the worst part of the crisis ehas passede,
and almost all the losses and failures attendant on it are consummated.
The machinery of the system withholds, until for many purposes it comes
too late, the very medicine which the theory of the system prescribes as
the fappropriatef remedy.*

This function of banks in filling up the gap made in mercantile credit
by the consequences of undue speculation and its revulsion, is so
entirely indispensable, that if the Act of 1844 continues unrepealed,
there can be no difficulty in foreseeing that its provisions must be
suspended, as they were in 1847, in every period of great commercial
difficulty, as soon as the crisis has really and completely set in.†
Were this all, there would be no absolute inconsistency in maintaining
the restriction as a means of preventing a crisis, and relaxing it for
the purpose of relieving one. But there is another objection, of a still
more radical and comprehensive character, to the new system.

Professing, in theory, to require that a paper currency shall vary in
its amount in exact conformity to the variations of a metallic currency,
it provides, in fact, that in every case of an efflux of gold, a
corresponding diminution shall take place in the quantity of bank notes;
in other words, that every exportation of the precious metals shall be
virtually drawn from the circulation; it being assumed that this would
be the case if the currency were wholly metallic. This theory, and these
practical arrangements, are Edition: current; Page: [673] adapted to the
case in which the drain of gold originates in a rise of prices produced
by an undue expansion of currency or credit; but they are adapted to no
case beside.

When the efflux of gold is the last stage of a series of effects arising
from an increase of the currency, or from an expansion of credit
tantamount in its effect on prices to an increase of currency, it is in
that case a fair assumption that in a purely metallic system the gold
exported would be drawn from the currency itself; because such a drain,
being in its nature unlimited, will necessarily continue as long as
currency and credit are undiminished. But an exportation of the precious
metals often arises from no causes affecting currency or credit, but
simply from an unusual extension of foreign payments, arising either
from the state of the markets for commodities, or from some circumstance
not commercial. In this class of causes, four, of powerful operation,
are included, of each of which the last fifty years of English history
afford repeated instances. The first is that of an extraordinary foreign
expenditure by government, either political or military; as in the
grevolutionary war, and, as long as it lasted, during the hCrimean
warhg. The second is the case of a large exportation of capital for
foreign investment; such as the loans and mining operations which partly
contributed to the crisis of 1825, and the American speculations which
were the principal cause of the crisis of 1839. The third is a failure
of crops in the countries which supply ithe raw material of important
manufactures; such as the cotton failure in America, which compelled
England, in 1847, to incur unusual liabilities for the purchase of that
commodity at an advanced price. The fourth is a bad harvest, and a great
consequent importation of food; of which the years 1846 and 1847
fpresentedf an example surpassing all antecedent experience.

In none of these cases, if the currency were metallic, would the gold or
silver exported for the purposes in question be necessarily, or even
probably, drawn kwhollyk from the circulation. It would be drawn from
the hoards, which under a metallic currency always exist to a very large
amount; in uncivilized countries, in the hands of all who can afford it;
in civilized countries chiefly in the form of bankers’ reserves. Mr.
Tooke, in his “Inquiry into the Currency Principle,” bears testimony to
this fact; but it is to Mr. Fullarton that the public are indebted for
the clearest and most satisfactory elucidation of it. As I am not aware
that this part of the theory of currency has been set forth by any other
writer with anything like the same degree of completeness, I shall quote
somewhat largely from this able production.

Edition: current; Page: [674]
“No person who has ever resided in an Asiatic country, where hoarding is
carried on to a far larger extent in proportion to the existing stock of
wealth, and where the practice has become much more deeply engrafted in
the habits of the people, by traditionary apprehensions of insecurity
and the difficulty of finding safe and remunerative investments, than in
any European community—no person who has had personal experience of this
state of society, can be at a loss to recollect innumerable instances of
large metallic treasures extracted in times of pecuniary difficulty from
the coffers of individuals by the temptation of a high rate of interest,
and brought in aid of the public necessities, nor, on the other hand, of
the facility with which those treasures have been absorbed again, when
the inducements which had drawn them into light were no longer in
operation. In countries more advanced in civilization and wealth than
the Asiatic principalities, and where no man is in fear of attracting
the cupidity of power by an external display of riches, but where the
interchange of commodities is still almost universally conducted through
the medium of a metallic circulation, as is the case with most of the
commercial countries on the Continent of Europe, the motives for
amassing the precious metals may be less powerful than in the majority
of Asiatic principalities; but the ability to accumulate being more
widely extended, the absolute quantity amassed will be found probably to
bear a considerably larger proportion to the population.* In those
states which lie exposed to hostile invasion, or whose social condition
is unsettled and menacing, the motive indeed must still be very strong;
and in a nation carrying on an extensive commerce, both foreign and
internal, without any considerable aid from any of the banking
substitutes for money, the reserves of gold and silver indispensably
required to secure the regularity of payments, must of themselves
engross a share of the circulating coin which it would not be easy to
estimate.

“In this country, where the banking system has been carried to an extent
and perfection unknown in any other part of Europe, and may be said to
have entirely superseded the use of coin, except for retail dealings and
the purposes of foreign commerce, the incentives to private hoarding
exist no longer, and the hoards have all been transferred to the banks,
or rather, I should say, to the Bank of England. But in France, where
the bank-note circulation is still comparatively limited, the quantity
of gold Edition: current; Page: [675] and silver coin in existence I
find now currently estimated, on what are described as the latest
authorities, at the enormous sum of 120 millions sterling; nor is the
estimate at all at variance with the reasonable probabilities of the
case. Of this vast treasure there is every reason to presume that a very
large proportion, probably by much the greater part, is absorbed in the
hoards. If you present for payment a bill for a thousand francs to a
French banker, he brings you the silver in a sealed bag from his strong
room. And not the banker only, but every merchant and trader, according
to his means, is under the necessity of keeping by him a stock of cash
sufficient not only for his ordinary disbursements, but to meet any
unexpected demands. That the quantity of specie accumulated in these
innumerable depôts, not in France only, but all over the Continent,
where banking institutions are still either entirely wanting or very
imperfectly organized, is not merely immense in itself, but admits of
being largely drawn upon, and transferred even in vast masses from one
country to another, with very little, if any, effect on prices, or other
material derangements, we have had some remarkable proofs:” among
others, “the signal success which attended the simultaneous efforts of
some of the principal European powers (Russia, Austria, Prussia, Sweden,
and Denmark) to replenish their treasuries, and to replace with coin a
considerable portion of the depreciated paper which the necessities of
the war had forced upon them, and this at the very time when the
available stock of the precious metals over the world had been reduced
by the exertions of England to recover her metallic currency. . . . .
There can be no doubt that these combined operations were on a scale of
very extraordinary magnitude, that they were accomplished without any
sensible injury to commerce or public prosperity, or any other effect
than some temporary derangement of the exchanges, and that the private
hoards of treasure accumulated throughout Europe during the war must
have been the principal source from which all this gold and silver was
collected. And no person, I think, can fairly contemplate the vast
superflux of metallic wealth thus proved to be at all times in
existence, and, though in a dormant and inert state, always ready to
spring into activity on the first indication of a sufficiently intense
demand, without feeling themselves compelled to admit the possibility of
the mines being even shut up for years together, and the production of
the metals altogether suspended, while there might be scarcely a
perceptible alteration in the exchangeable value of the metal.”*

Applying this to the currency doctrine and its advocates, “one might
imagine,” says Mr. Fullarton,† “that they supposed the gold which is
Edition: current; Page: [676] drained off for exportation from a country
using a currency exclusively metallic, to be collected by driblets at
the fairs and markets, or from the tills of the grocers and mercers.
They never even allude to the existence of such a thing as a great hoard
of the metals, though upon the action of the hoards depends the whole
economy of international payments between specie-circulating
communities, while any operation of the money collected in hoards upon
prices must, even according to the currency hypothesis, be wholly
impossible. We know from experience what enormous payments in gold and
silver specie-circulating countries are capable, at times, of making,
without the least disturbance of their internal prosperity; and whence
is it supposed that these payments come, but from their hoards? Let us
think how the money market of a country transacting all its exchanges
through the medium of the precious metals only, would be likely to be
affected by the necessity of making a foreign payment of several
millions. Of course the necessity could only be satisfied by a
transmission of capital; and would not the competition for the
possession of capital for transmission which the occasion would call
forth, necessarily raise the market rate of interest? If the payment was
to be made by the government, would not the government, in all
probability, have to open a new loan on terms more than usually
favourable to the lender?” If made by merchants, would it not be drawn
either from the deposits in banks, or from the reserves which merchants
keep by them in default of banks, or would it not oblige them to obtain
the necessary amount of specie by going into the money market as
borrowers? “And would not all this inevitably act upon the hoards, and
draw forth into activity a portion of the gold and silver which the
moneydealers had been accumulating, and some of them with the express
view of watching such opportunities for turning their treasures to
advantage?l . . . .

“Tol come to the present time [1844], the balance of payments with
nearly all Europe has for about four years past been in favour of this
country, and gold has been pouring in till the influx amounts to the
unheard-of sum of about fourteen millions sterling. Yet in all this
time, has any one heard a complaint of any serious suffering inflicted
on the people of the Continent? Have prices there been greatly depressed
beyond their Edition: current; Page: [677] range in this country? Have
wages fallen, or have merchants been extensively ruined by the universal
depreciation of their stock? There has occurred nothing of the kind. The
tenor of commercial and monetary affairs has been everywhere even and
tranquil; and in France more particularly, an improving revenue and
extended commerce bear testimony to the continued progress of internal
prosperity. It may be doubted, indeed, if this great efflux of gold has
withdrawn from that portion of the metallic wealth of the nation which
really circulates, a single napoleon. And it has been equally obvious,
from the undisturbed state of credit, that not only has the supply of
specie indispensable for the conduct of business in the retail market
been all the while uninterrupted, but that the hoards have continued to
furnish every facility requisite for the regularity of mercantile
payments. It is of the very essence of the metallic system, that the
hoards, in all cases of probable occurrence, should be equal to both
objects; that they should, in the first place, supply the bullion
demanded for exportation, and in the next place, should keep up the home
circulation to its legitimate complement. Every man trading under that
system, who, in the course of his business, may have frequent occasion
to remit large sums in specie to foreign countries, must either keep by
him a sufficient treasure of his own or must have the means of borrowing
enough from his neighbours, not only to make up when wanted the amount
of his remittances, but to enable him, moreover, to carry on his
ordinary transactions at home without interruption.”

In a country in which credit is carried to so great an extent as in
England, one great reserve, in a single establishment, the Bank of
England, supplies the place, as far as the precious metals are
concerned, of the multitudinous reserves of other countries. The
theoretical principle, therefore, of the currency doctrine would
require, that all those drains of the metal, which, if the currency were
purely metallic, would be taken from the hoards, should be allowed to
operate freely upon the reserve in the coffers of the Bank of England,
without any attempt to stop it either by a diminution of the currency or
by a contraction of credit. Nor to this would there be any well-grounded
objection, unless the drain were so great as to threaten the exhaustion
of the reserve, and a consequent stoppage of payments; a danger against
which it is mpossiblem to take adequate precautions, because in the
cases which we are considering, the drain is for foreign payments of
definite amount, and stops of itself as soon as these are effected. And
in all systems it is admitted that the habitual reserve of the Bank
should exceed the utmost amount to which experience warrants the belief
that such a drain may extend; which extreme limit Mr. Fullarton affirms
to be seven Edition: current; Page: [678] millions, but Mr. Tooke
recommends an average reserve of tenn, and in his last publication, of
twelve millionsn. oUnder these circumstances, the habitual reserve,
which would never be employed in discounts, but kept to be paid out
exclusively in exchange for cheques or bank notes, would be sufficient
for a crisis of this description; which therefore would pass off without
having its difficulties increased by a contraction either of credit or
of the circulation. But this, the most advantageous dénouement that the
case admits of, and not only consistent with but required by the
professed principle of the system, the panegyrists of the system claim
for it as a great merit that it prevents. They boast, that on the first
appearance of a drain for exportation—whatever may be its cause, and
whether, under a metallic currency, it would involve a contraction of
credit or not—the Bank is at once obliged to curtail its advances.o And
this, be it remembered, when there has been no speculative rise of
prices which it is indispensable to correct, no unusual extension of
credit requiring contraction; but the demand for gold is solely
occasioned by foreign payments on account of government, or large corn
importations consequent on a bad harvest.p

Edition: current; Page: [679]
qEven supposing that the reserve is insufficient to meet the foreign
payments, and thatq the means wherewith to make them rhave to be takenr
from the loanable capital of the country, the consequence of which is a
rise of the rate of interests; ins such circumstances some pressure on
the money market is unavoidable, but that pressure is much increased in
severity by the tseparation of the banking from the issue departmentt.
The case is generally stated as if the Act only operated in one way,
namely, by preventing the Bank, when it has parted with (say) three
millions of bullion in exchange for three millions of its notes, from
again lending those notes, in discounts or other advances. But the Act
really does much more than this. It is well known, that the first
operation of a drain is always on the banking department. The bank
deposits constitute the bulk of the unemployed and disposable capital of
the country; and capital wanted for foreign payments is almost always
obtained mainly by drawing out deposits. Supposing three millions to be
the amount wanted, three millions of notes are drawn from the banking
department (either directly or through the private bankers, who keep the
bulk of their reserves with the Bank of England), and the three millions
of notes, thus obtained, are presented at the Issue Department, and
exchanged against gold for exportation. Thus a drain upon the country at
large of only three millions, is a drain upon the Bank virtually of six
millions. The deposits have lost three millions, and the reserve of the
Issue Department has lost an equal amount. As the two departments, so
long as the Act remains in operation, cannot even in the utmost
extremity help one another, each must take its separate precautions for
its own safety. Whatever measures, therefore, on the part of the Bank,
would have been required under the old system by a drain of six
millions, are now rendered necessary by a drain only of three. The Issue
Department protects itself in the manner prescribed by the Act, by not
re-issuing the three millions of notes which have been returned to it.
But the Banking Department must take measures to replenish its reserve,
which has been reduced by three millions. Its liabilities having also
decreased three millions, by the loss of that amount of deposits, the
reserve, on the ordinary banking principle of a third of the
liabilities, will bear a reduction of one million. But the other two
millions it must procure by letting that amount of Edition: current;
Page: [680] advances uout, and not renewingu them. Not only vmust it
raise its rate of interest, but it must effect, by whatever means, a
diminution of two millions in the total amount of its discountsw: or it
must sell securities to an equal amountw. This violent action on the
money market for the purpose of replenishing the Banking reserve, is
wholly occasioned by the Act of 1844. If the restrictions of that Act
did not exist, the Bank, instead of contracting its discounts, would
simply transfer two millions, either in gold or in notes, from the Issue
to the Banking Department; not in order to lend them to the public, but
to secure the solvency of the Banking Department in the event of further
unexpected demands by the depositors. And unless the drain continued,
and reached so great an amount as to seem likely to exceed the whole of
the gold in the reserves of both departments, the Bank would be under no
necessity, while the pressure lasted, of withholding from commerce its
accustomed amount of accommodation, at a rate of interest corresponding
to the increased demand.*p

I am aware it will be said that by allowing drains of this character to
operate freely upon the Bank reserve until they cease of themselves, a
contraction of the currency and of credit would not be prevented, but
only postponed; since if a limitation of issues were not resorted to for
the purpose of checking the drain in its commencement, the same or a
still Edition: current; Page: [681] greater limitation must take place
afterwards, in order, by acting on prices, to bring back xthis largex
quantity of gold, for the indispensable purpose of replenishing the Bank
reserve. But in this argument several things are overlooked. In the
first place, the gold might be brought back, not by a fall of prices,
but by the much more rapid and convenient medium of a rise of the rate
of interest, involving no fall of any prices except the ypricey of
securities. Either English securities would be bought on account of
foreigners, or foreign securities held in England would be sent abroad
for sale, both which operations took place largely during the mercantile
difficulties of 1847, and not only checked the efflux of gold, but
turned the tide and brought the metal back. It was not, therefore,
brought back by a contraction of the currency, though in this case it
certainly was so by a contraction of loans. But zeven this is notz
always aindispensable.a For in the second place, it is not necessary
that the gold should return with the same suddenness with which it went
out. A great portion would probably return in the ordinary way of
commerce, in payment for exported commodities. The extra gains made by
dealers and producers in foreign countries through the extra payments
they receive from this country, are very likely to be partly expended in
increased purchases of English commodities, either for consumption or on
speculation, though the effect may not manifest itself with sufficient
rapidity to enable the transmission of gold to be dispensed with in the
first instance. These extra purchases would turn the balance of payments
in favour of the country, and gradually restore a portion of the
exported gold; and the remainder would probably be brought back,
bwithout any considerableb rise of the rate of interest in England, cby
the fall of it in foreign countries, occasioned by the addition of some
millions of gold to the loanable capital of those countries. dIndeed, in
the state of things consequent on the gold discoveries, when the
enormous quantity of Edition: current; Page: [682] gold annually
produced in Australia, and much of that from California, is distributed
to other countries through England, and a month seldom passes without a
large arrival, the Bank reserves can replenish themselves without any
re-importation of the gold previously carried off by a drain. All that
is needful is an intermission, and a very brief intermission is
sufficient, of the exportation.

For these reasons it appears to me, that notwithstanding the beneficial
operation of the Act of 1844 in the first stages of one kind of
commercial crisis (that produced by over-speculation), it on the whole
materially aggravates the severity of commercial revulsions. And not
only are contractions of credit made more severe by the Act, they are
also made greatly more frequent. “Suppose,” says Mr. George Walker, in a
clear, impartial, and conclusive series of papers in the Aberdeen
Herald, forming one of the best existing discussions of the present
question—“suppose that, of eighteen millions of gold, ten are in the
issue department and eight are in the banking department. The result is
the same as under a metallic currency with only eight millions in
reserve, instead of eighteen. . . . . . The effect of the Bank Act is,
that the proceedings of the Bank under a drain are not determined by the
amount of gold within its vaults, but are, or ought to be, determined by
the portion of it belonging to the banking department. With the whole of
the gold at its disposal, it may find it unnecessary to interfere with
credit, or force down prices, if a drain leave a fair reserve behind.
With only the banking reserve at its disposal, it must, from the narrow
margin it has to operate on, meet all drains by counteractives more or
less strong, to the injury of the commercial world; and if it fail to do
so, as it may fail, the consequence is destruction. Hence the
extraordinary and frequent variations of the rate of interest under the
Bank Act. Since 1847, when the eyes of the Bank were opened to its true
position, it has felt it necessary, as a precautionary measure, that
every variation in the reserve should be accompanied by an alteration in
the rate of interest.”[*] To make the Act innocuous, therefore, it would
be necessary that the Bank, in addition to the whole of the gold in the
Issue Department, should retain as great a reserve in gold or notes in
the Banking Department alone, as would suffice under the old system for
the security both of the issues and of the deposits.d

§ 5. [Should the issue of bank notes be confined to a single
establishment?] There remain two questions respecting a bank-note
currency, which have also been a subject of considerable discussion of
late years: whether the privilege of providing it should be confined to
a single establishment, Edition: current; Page: [683] such as the Bank
of England, or a plurality of issuers should be allowed; and in the
latter case, whether any peculiar precautions are requisite or
advisable, to protect the holders of notes against losses occasioned by
the insolvency of the issuers.

The course of the preceding speculations has led us to attach so much
less of peculiar importance to bank notes, as compared with other forms
of credit, than accords with the notions generally current, that
questions respecting the regulation of so very small a part of the
general mass of credit, cannot appear to us of such momentous import as
they are sometimes considered. Bank notes, however, have so far a real
peculiarity, that they are the only form of credit sufficiently
convenient for all the purposes of circulation, to be able entirely to
supersede the use of metallic money for internal purposes. Though the
extension of the use of cheques has a tendency more and more to diminish
the number of bank notes, as it would that of the sovereigns or other
coins which would take their place if they were abolished; there is
sure, for a long time to come, to be a considerable supply of them,
wherever the necessary degree of commercial confidence exists, and their
free use is permitted. The exclusive privilege, therefore, of issuing
them, if reserved to the Government or to some one body, is a source of
great pecuniary gain. That this gain should be obtained for the nation
at large is both practicable and desirable: and if the management of a
bank-note currency ought to be so completely mechanical, so entirely a
thing of fixed rule, as it is made by the Act of 1844, there seems no
reason why this mechanism should be worked for the profit of any private
issuer, rather than for the public treasury. If, however, a plan be
preferred which leaves the variations in the amount of issues in any
degree whatever to the discretion of the issuers, it is not desirable
that to the ever-growing attributions of the Government, so delicate a
function should be superadded; and that the attention of the heads of
the state should be diverted from larger objects, by their being
besieged with the applications, and made a mark for all the attacks,
which are never spared to those deemed to be responsible for any acts,
however minute, connected with the regulation of the currency. It would
be better that treasury notes, exchangeable for gold on demand, should
be issued to a fixed amount, not exceeding the minimum of a bank-note
currency; the remainder of the notes which may be required being left to
be supplied either by one or by a number of private banking
establishments. Or an establishment like the Bank of England might
supply the whole country, on condition of lending fifteen or twenty
millions of its notes to the government without interest; which would
give the same pecuniary advantage to the state as if it issued that
number of its own notes.

The reason ordinarily alleged in condemnation of the system of plurality
Edition: current; Page: [684] of issuers which existed in England before
the Act of 1844, and under certain limitations still subsists, is that
the competition of these different issuers induces them to increase the
amount of their notes to an injurious extent. But we have seen that the
power which bankers have of augmenting their issues, and the degree of
mischief which they can produce by it, are quite trifling compared with
the current over-estimate. As remarked by Mr. Fullarton,* the
extraordinary increase of banking competition occasioned by the
establishment of the joint-stock banks, a competition often of the most
reckless kind, has proved utterly powerless to enlarge the aggregate
mass of the bank-note circulation; that aggregate circulation having, on
the contrary, actually decreased. In athe absence of any special case
for an exception to freedom of industry, the general rule ought to
prevail. It appears desirable, however,a to maintain one great
establishment like the Bank of England, distinguished from other banks
of issue in this, that it alone is required to pay in gold, the others
being at liberty to pay their notes with notes of the central
establishment. The object of this is that there may be one body,
responsible for maintaining a reserve of the precious metals sufficient
to meet any drain that can reasonably be expected to take place. By
disseminating this responsibility among a number of banks, it is
prevented from operating efficaciously upon any: or if it be still
enforced against one, the reserves of the metals retained by all the
others are capital kept idle in pure waste, which may be dispensed with
by allowing them at their option to pay in Bank of England notes.

§ 6. [Should the holders of notes be protected in any peculiar manner
against failure of payment?] The question remains whether, in case of a
plurality of issuers, any peculiar precautions are needed to protect the
holders of notes from the consequences of failure of payment. Before
1826, the insolvency of banks of issue was a frequent and very serious
evil, often spreading distress through a whole neighbourhood, and at one
blow depriving provident industry of the results of long and painful
saving. This was one of the chief reasons which induced Parliament, in
that year, to prohibit the issue of bank notes of a denomination below
five pounds, that the labouring classes at least might be as little as
possible exposed to participate in this suffering. As an additional
safeguard, it has been suggested to give the holders of notes a priority
over other creditors, or to require bankers to deposit stock or other
public securities as a pledge for the whole amount of their issues. The
insecurity aof the former banknote Edition: current; Page: [685]
currency of England was bpartlyb the work of the law, which, in order to
give a qualified monopoly of banking business to the Bank of England,
had actually made the formation of safe banking establishments a
punishable offence, by prohibiting the existence of any banks, in town
or country, whether of issue or deposit, with a number of partners
exceeding six. This truly characteristic specimen of the old system of
monopoly and restriction was done away with in 1826, both as to issues
and deposits, everywhere but in a district of sixty-five miles radius
round London, and in 1833 in that district also, as far as relates to
deposits. cIt was hoped that the numerous joint-stock banks since
established would have furnished a more trustworthy currency, and that
under their influence the banking system of England would have been
almost as secure to the public as that of Scotland (where banking was
always free) has been for two centuries past. But the almost incredible
instances of reckless and fraudulent mismanagement which these
institutions have of late afforded (though in some of the most notorious
cases the delinquent establishments have not been banks of issue), have
shown only too clearly that, south of the Tweed at least, the
joint-stock principle applied to banking is not the adequate safeguard
it was so confidently supposed to be: and it is difficult now to resist
the conviction, that if plurality of issuers is allowed to existd, some
kind of special security in favour of the holders of notes should be
exacted as an imperative condition.c

Edition: current; Page: [686]


CHAPTER XXV: Of the Competition of Different Countries in the Same Market

§ 1. [Causes which enable one country to undersell another] In the
phraseology of the Mercantile System, the language and doctrines of
which are still the basis of what may be called the political economy of
the selling classes, as distinguished from the buyers or consumers,
there is no word of more frequent recurrence or more perilous import
than the word underselling. To undersell other countries—not to be
undersold by other countries—were spoken of, and are still very often
spoken of, almost as if they were the sole purposes for which production
and commodities exist. The feelings of rival tradesmen, prevailing among
nations, overruled for centuries all sense of the general community of
advantage which commercial countries derive from the prosperity of one
another: and that commercial spirit which is now one of the strongest
obstacles to wars, was during a certain period of European history their
principal cause.

Even in the more enlightened view now attainable of the nature and
consequences of international commerce, some, though a comparatively
small, space must still be made for the fact of commercial rivality.
Nations may, like individual dealers, be competitors, with opposite
interests, in the markets of some commodities, while in others they are
in the more fortunate relation of reciprocal customers. The benefit of
commerce does not consist, as it was once thought to do, in the
commodities sold; but, since the commodities sold are the means of
obtaining those which are bought, a nation would be cut off from the
real advantage of commerce, the imports, if it could not induce other
nations to take any of its commodities in exchange; and in proportion as
the competition of other countries compels it to offer its commodities
on cheaper terms, on pain of not selling them at all, the imports which
it obtains by its foreign trade are procured at greater cost.

These points have been adequately, though incidentally, illustrated in
some of the preceding chapters. But the great space which the topic has
filled, and continues to fill, in economical speculations, and in the
practical Edition: current; Page: [687] anxieties both of politicians
and of dealers and manufacturers, makes it desirable, before quitting
the subject of international exchange, to subjoin a few observations on
the things which do, and on those which do not, enable countries to
undersell one another.

One country can only undersell another in a given market, to the extent
of entirely expelling her from it, on two conditions. In the first
place, she must have a greater advantage than the second country in the
production of the article exported by both; meaning by a greater
advantage (as has been already so fully explained) not absolutely, but
in comparison with other commodities; and in the second place, such must
be her relation with the customer country in respect to the demand for
each other’s products, and such the consequent state of international
values, as to give away to the customer country more than the whole
advantage possessed by the rival country; otherwise the rival will still
be able to hold her ground in the market.

Let us revert to the imaginary hypothesis aof a trade between England
and Germany in cloth and linen: England being capable of producing 10
yards of cloth at the same cost with 15 yards of linen, Germany at the
same cost with 20, and the two commodities being exchanged between the
two countries (cost of carriage apart) at some intermediate rate, say 10
for 17. Germany could not be permanently undersold in the English
market, and expelled from it, unless by a country which offered not
merely more than 17, but more than 20 yards of linen for 10 of cloth.
Short of that, the competition would only oblige Germany to pay dearer
for cloth, but would not disable her from exporting linen. The country,
therefore, which could undersell Germany, must, in the first place, be
able to produce linen at less cost, compared with cloth, than Germany
herself; and in the next place, must have such a demand for cloth, or
other English commodities, as would compel her, even when she became
sole occupant of the market, to give a greater advantage to England than
Germany could give by resigning the whole of hers; to give, for example,
21 yards for 10. For if not—if, for example, the equation of
international demand, after Germany was excluded, gave a ratio of 18 for
10, Germany could again enter into the competition; Germany would be now
the underselling nation; and there would be a point, perhaps 19 for 10,
at which both countries would be able to maintain their ground, and to
sell in England enough linen to pay for the cloth, or other English
commodities, for which, on these newly-adjusted terms of interchange,
they had a demand. In like manner, England, as an exporter of cloth,
could only be driven from the German market by some rival whose superior
advantages in the production of cloth enabled her, and the intensity of
whose demand for German produce compelled her, Edition: current; Page:
[688] to offer 10 yards of cloth, not merely for less than 17 yards of
linen, but for less than 15. In that case, England could no longer carry
on the trade without loss; but in any case short of this, she would
merely be obliged to give to Germany more cloth for less linen than she
had previously given.

It thus appears that the alarm of being permanently undersold may be
taken much too easily; may be taken when the thing really to be
anticipated is not the loss of the trade, but the minor inconvenience of
carrying it on at a diminished advantage; an inconvenience chiefly
falling on the consumers of foreign commodities, and not on the
producers or sellers of the exported article. It is no sufficient ground
of apprehension to the English producers, to find that some other
country can sell cloth in foreign markets at some particular time, a
trifle cheaper than they can themselves afford to do in the existing
state of prices in England. Suppose them to be temporarily undersold,
and their exports diminished; the imports will exceed the exports, there
will be a new distribution of the precious metals, prices will fall, and
as all the money expenses of the English producers will be diminished,
they will be able (if the case falls short of that stated in the
preceding paragraph) again to compete with their rivals. The loss which
England will incur, will not fall upon the exporters, but upon those who
consume imported commodities; who, with money incomes reduced in amount,
will have to pay the same or even an increased price for all things
produced in foreign countries.

§ 2. [Low wages is one of the causes which enable one country to
undersell another] Such, I conceive, is the true theory, or rationale,
of underselling. It will be observed that it takes no account of some
things which we hear spoken of, oftener perhaps than any others, in the
character of causes exposing a country to be undersold.

According to the preceding doctrine, a country cannot be undersold in
any commodity, unless the rival country has a stronger inducement than
itself for devoting its labour and capital to the production of the
commodity; arising from the fact that by doing so it occasions a greater
saving of labour and capital, to be shared between itself and its
customers—a greater increase of the aggregate produce of the world. The
underselling, therefore, though a loss to the undersold country, is an
advantage to the world at large; the substituted commerce being one
which economizes more of the labour and capital of mankind, and adds
more to their collective wealth, than the commerce superseded by it. The
advantage, of course, consists in being able to produce the commodity of
better quality, or with less labour (compared with other things); or
perhaps not with less labour, but in less time; with a less prolonged
detention of the capital employed. This may arise from greater natural
advantages (such as soil, climate, richness of Edition: current; Page:
[689] mines); superior capability, either natural or acquired, in the
labourers; better division of labour, and better tools, or machinery.
But there is no place left in this theory for the case of lower wages.
This, however, in the theories commonly current, is a favourite cause of
underselling. We continually hear of the disadvantage under which the
British producer labours, both in foreign markets and even in his own,
through the lower wages paid by his foreign rivals. These lower wages,
we are told, enable, or are always on the point of enabling them to sell
at lower prices, and to dislodge the English manufacturer from all
markets in which he is not artificially protected.

Before examining this opinion on grounds of principle, it is worth while
to bestow a moment’s consideration upon it as a question of fact. Is it
true, that the wages of manufacturing labour are lower in foreign
countries than in England, in any sense in which low wages are an
advantage to the capitalist? The artisan of Ghent or Lyons may earn less
wages in a day, but does he not do less work? Degrees of efficiency
considered, does his labour cost less to his employer? Though wages may
be lower on the Continent, is not the Cost of Labour, which is the real
element in the competition, very nearly the same? That it is so seems
the opinion of competent judges, and is confirmed by the very little
difference in the rate of profit between England and the Continental
countries. But if so, the opinion is absurd that English producers can
be undersold by their Continental rivals from this cause. It is only in
America that the supposition is primâ facie admissible. In America,
wages are much higher than in England, if we mean by wages the daily
earnings of a labourer: but the productive power of American labour is
so great—its efficiency, combined with the favourable circumstances in
which it is exerted, makes it worth so much to the purchaser, that the
Cost of Labour is lower in America than in England; as is aindicateda by
the fact that the general rate of profits and of interest is bhigher.

§ 3. [Low wages is one of those causes when peculiar to certain branches
of industry] But is it true that low wages, even in the sense of low
Cost of Labour, enable a country to sell cheaper in the foreign market?
I amean, of coursea, low wages which are common to the whole productive
industry of the country.

If wages, in any of the departments of industry which supply exports,
are kept, artificially, or by some accidental cause, below the general
rate of wages in the country, this is a real advantage in the foreign
market. It lessens the comparative cost of production of those articles,
in relation to Edition: current; Page: [690] others; and has the same
effect as if their production required so much less labour. Take, for
instance, the case of the United States in respect to certain
commoditiesb, prior to the civil war. Tobaccob and cotton, two great
articles of export, cwerec produced by slave labour, while food and
manufactures generally dwered produced by free labourers, eeither
workinge on their own account or fpaid by wages. In spite of the
inferior efficiency of slave labour, there can be no reasonable doubt
that in a country where the wages of free labour gwereg so high, the
work executed by slaves hwash a better bargain to the capitalist. To
whatever extent it iwasi so, this smaller cost of labour, being not
general, but limited to those employments, jwasj just as much a cause of
cheapness in the products, both in the home and in the foreign market,
as if they had been made by a less quantity of labour. Ifk, whenk the
slaves in the Southern States were lemancipated, mtheir wages rose to
the general level of the earnings of free labour in America, nthat
countryn might ohave beeno obliged to erase some of the slave-grown
articles from the catalogue of pitsp exports, and would certainly be
unable to sell any of them in the foreign market at the qaccustomedq
price. rAccordingly, American cotton is now habitually at a much higher
price than before the war. Its previous cheapness wasr partly an
artificial cheapness, which may be compared to that produced by a bounty
on production or on exportation: or, considering the means by which it
swass obtained, an apter comparison would be with the cheapness of
stolen goods.

An advantage of a similar economical, though of a very different moral
character, is that possessed by domestic manufactures; fabrics produced
in the leisure hours of families partially occupied in other pursuits,
who, not depending for subsistence on the produce of the manufacture,
can afford to sell it at any price, however low, for which they think it
worth while to take the trouble of producing. In an account of the
Canton of Zurich, to which I have had occasion to refer on another
subject, it is observed,* “The workman of Zurich is to-day a
manufacturer, to-morrow again an agriculturist, and changes his
toccupationst with the seasons, in a continual Edition: current; Page:
[691] round. Manufacturing industry and tillage advance hand in hand, in
inseparable alliance, and in this union of the two occupations the
secret may be found, why the simple and unlearned Swiss manufacturer can
always go on competing, and increasing in prosperity, in the face of
those extensive establishments fitted out with great economic, and (what
is still more important) intellectual, resources. Even in those parts of
the Canton where manufactures have extended themselves the most widely,
only one-seventh of all the families belong to manufactures alone;
four-sevenths combine that employment with agriculture. The advantage of
this domestic or family manufacture consists chiefly in the fact, that
it is compatible with all other avocations, or rather that it may in
part be regarded as only a supplementary employment. In winter in the
dwellings of the operatives, the whole family employ themselves in it:
but as soon as spring appears, those on whom the early field labours
devolve, abandon the in-door work; many a shuttle stands still; by
degrees, as the field-work increases, one member of the family follows
another, till at last, at the harvest, and during the so-called ‘great
works,’ all hands seize the implements of husbandry; but in unfavourable
weather, and in all otherwise vacant hours, the work in the cottage is
resumed, and when the ungenial season again recurs, the people return in
the same gradual order to their home occupation, until they have all
resumed it.”

In the case of these domestic manufactures, the comparative cost of
production, on which the interchange between countries depends, is much
lower than in proportion to the quantity of labour employed. The
work-people, looking to the earnings of their loom for a part only, if
for any part, of their actual maintenance, can afford to work for a less
remuneration than the lowest rate of wages which can upermanentlyu exist
in the employments by which the labourer has to support the whole
expense of a family. Working, as they do, not for an employer but for
themselves, they may be said to carry on the manufacture at no cost at
all, except the small expense of a loom and of the material; and the
limit of possible cheapness is not the necessity of living by their
trade but that of earning enough by the work to make that social
employment of their leisure hours not disagreeable.

§ 4. [Low wages is not one of those causes when common to all branches
of industry] These two cases, of slave labour and of domestic
manufactures, exemplify the conditions under which low wages enable a
country to sell its commodities cheaper in foreign markets, and
consequently to undersell its rivals, or to avoid being undersold by
them. But no such advantage is conferred by low wages when common to all
branches Edition: current; Page: [692] of industry. General low wages
never caused any country to undersell its rivals, nor did general high
wages ever hinder it from doing so.

To demonstrate this, we must return to an elementary principle which was
discussed in a former chapter.* General low wages do not cause low
prices, nor high wages high prices, within the country itself. General
prices are not raised by a rise of wages, any more than they would be
raised by an increase of the quantity of labour required in all
production. Expenses which affect all commodities equally, have no
influence on prices. If the maker of broadcloth or cutlery, and nobody
else, had to pay higher wages, the price of his commodity would rise,
just as it would if he had to employ more labour; because otherwise he
would gain less profit than other producers, and nobody would engage in
the employment. But if everybody has to pay higher wages, or everybody
to employ more labour, the loss must be submitted to; as it affects
everybody alike, no one can hope to get rid of it by a change of
employment, each therefore resigns himself to a diminution of profits,
and prices remain as they were. In like manner, general low wages, or a
general increase in the productiveness of labour, does not make prices
low, but profits high. If wages fall, (meaning here by wages the cost of
labour,) why, on that account, should the producer lower his price? He
will be forced, it may be said, by the competition of other capitalists
who will crowd into his employment. But other capitalists are also
paying lower wages, and by entering into competition with him they would
gain nothing but what they are gaining already. The rate then at which
labour is paid, as well as the quantity of it which is employed, affects
neither the value nor the price of the commodity produced, except in so
far as it is peculiar to that commodity, and not common to commodities
generally.

Since low wages are not a cause of low prices in the country itself, so
neither do they cause it to offer its commodities in foreign markets at
a lower price. It is quite true that if the cost of labour is lower in
America than in England, America could sell her cottons to Cuba at a
lower price than England, and still gain as high a profit as the English
manufacturer. But it is not with the profit of the English manufacturer
that the American cotton spinner will make his comparison; it is with
the profits of other American capitalists. These enjoy, in common with
himself, the benefit of a low cost of labour, and have accordingly a
high rate of profit. This high profit the cotton spinner must also have:
he will not content himself with the English profit. It is true he may
go on for a time at that lower rate, rather than change his employment;
and a trade may be carried on, sometimes for a long period, at a much
lower profit than that for which it would have been originally engaged
in. Countries which have a low Edition: current; Page: [693] cost of
labour, and high profits, do not for that reason undersell others, but
they do oppose a more obstinate resistance to being undersold, because
the producers can often submit to a diminution of profit without being
unable to live, and even to thrive, by their business. But athisa is all
which their advantage does for them: and in this resistance they will
not long persevere, when a change of times which may give them equal
profits with the rest of their countrymen has become manifestly
hopeless.

§ 5. [Some anomalous cases of trading communities examined] There is a
class of trading and exporting communities, on which a few words of
explanation seem to be required. These are hardly to be looked upon as
countries, carrying on an exchange of commodities with other countries,
but more properly as outlying agricultural or manufacturing
establishments belonging to a larger community. Our West India colonies,
for example, cannot be regarded as countries, with a productive capital
of their own. If Manchester, instead of being where it is, were on a
rock in the North Sea, (its present industry nevertheless continuing,)
it would still be but a town of England, not a country trading with
England; it would be merely, as now, aaa place where England finds it
convenient to carry on her cotton manufacture. The West Indies, in like
manner, are the place where England finds it convenient to carry on the
production of sugar, coffee, and a few other tropical commodities. All
the capital employed is English capital; almost all the industry is
carried on for English uses; there is little production of anything
except the staple commodities, and these are sent to England, not to be
exchanged for things exported to the colony and consumed by its
inhabitants, but to be sold in England for the benefit of the
proprietors there. The trade with the West Indies is therefore hardly to
be considered as external trade, but more resembles the traffic between
town and country, and is amenable to the principles of the home trade.
The rate of profit in the colonies will be regulated by English profits;
the expectation of profit must be about the same as in England, with the
addition of compensation for the disadvantages attending the more
distant and hazardous employment: and after allowance is made for those
disadvantages, the value and price of West India produce in the English
market must be regulated, (or rather must have been regulated formerly,)
like that of any English commodity, by the cost of production. For the
last btwelve or fifteenb years this principle has been in abeyance: the
price was first kept up beyond the ratio of the cost of production by
deficient supplies, which could not, owing to cthec deficiency of
labour, be increased; and more recently the admission of foreign
competition has introduced Edition: current; Page: [694] another
element, and dsome of the West India Islandsd are undersold, not so much
because wages are higher than in Cuba and Brazil, as because they are
higher than in England: for were they not so, Jamaica could sell her
sugars at Cuban prices, and still obtain, though not a Cuban, an English
rate of profit.

It is worth while also to notice another class of small, but in this
case mostly independent communities, which have supported and enriched
themselves almost without any productions of their own, (except ships
and marine equipments,) by a mere carrying trade, and commerce of
entrepôt; by buying the produce of one country, to sell it at a profit
in another. Such were Venice and the Hanse Towns. The case of these
communities is very simple. They made themselves and their capital the
instruments, not of production, but of accomplishing exchanges between
the productions of other countries. These exchanges earee attended with
an advantage to those countries—an increase of the aggregate returns to
industry—part of which went to indemnify the agents for the necessary
expenses of transport, and another part to remunerate the use of their
capital and mercantile skill. The countries themselves had not capital
disposable for the operation. When the Venetians became the agents of
the general commerce of Southern Europe, they had scarcely any
competitors: the thing would not have been done at all without them, and
there was really no limit to their profits except the limit to what the
ignorant feudal nobility fcould andf would give for the unknown luxuries
then first presented to their sight. At a later period competition
arose, and the profit of this operation, like that of others, became
amenable to natural laws. The carrying trade was taken up by Holland, a
country with productions of its own and a large accumulated capital. The
other nations of Europe also had now capital to spare, and were capable
of conducting their foreign trade for themselves; but Holland, having,
from a variety of circumstances, a lower rate of profit at home, could
afford to carry for other countries at a smaller advance on the original
cost of the goods, than would have been required by their own
capitalists; and Holland, therefore, engrossed the greatest part of the
carrying trade of all those countries which did not keep it to
themselves by Navigation Laws, constructed, like those of England, for
gthatg express purpose.

Edition: current; Page: [695]


CHAPTER XXVI: Of Distribution, as Affected by Exchange

§ 1. [Exchange and Money make no difference in the law of wages] We have
now completed, as far as is compatible with aour purposes and limitsa,
the exposition of the machinery through which the produce of a country
is apportioned among the different classes of its inhabitants; which is
no other than the machinery of Exchange, and has for the exponents of
its operation, the laws of Value and of Price. We shall now avail
ourselves of the light thus acquired, to cast a retrospective glance at
the subject of Distribution. The division of the produce among the three
classes, Labourers, Capitalists, and Landlords, when considered without
any reference to Exchange, appeared to depend on certain general laws.
It is fit that we should now consider whether these same laws still
operate, when the distribution takes place through the complex mechanism
of exchange and money; or whether the properties of the mechanism
interfere with and modify the presiding principles.

The primary division of the produce of human exertion and frugality is,
as we have seen, into three shares, wages, profits, and rent; and these
shares are portioned out to the persons entitled to them, in the form of
money, and by a process of exchange; or rather, the capitalist, with
whom in the usual arrangements of society the produce remains, pays in
money, to the other two sharers, the market value of their labour and
land. If we examine, on what the pecuniary value of labour, and the
pecuniary value of the use of land, depend, we shall find that it is on
the very same causes by which we found that wages and rent would be
regulated if there were no money and no exchange of commodities.

It is evident, in the first place, that the law of Wages is not affected
by the existence or non-existence of Exchange or Money. Wages depend on
the ratio between population and capital; and would do so if all the
capital in the world were the property of one association, or if the
capitalists among whom it is shared maintained each an establishment for
the production Edition: current; Page: [696] of every article consumed
in the community, exchange of commodities having no existence. As the
ratio between capital and population, bin all old countriesb, depends on
the strength of the checks by which the too rapid increase of population
is restrained, it may be said, popularly speaking, that wages depend on
the checks to population; that when the check is not death, by
starvation or disease, wages depend on the prudence of the labouring
people; and that wages in any country are habitually at the lowest rate,
to which in that country the clabourerc will suffer them to be depressed
rather than put a restraint upon multiplication.

What is here meant, however, by wages, is the labourer’s real scale of
comfort; the quantity he obtains of the things which nature or habit has
made necessary or agreeable to him: wages in the sense in which they are
of importance to the receiver. In the sense in which they are of
importance to the payer, they do not depend exclusively on such simple
principles. Wages in the first sense, the wages on which the labourer’s
comfort depends, we dwilld call real wages, or wages in kind. Wages in
the second sense, we may be permitted to call, for the present, money
wages; assuming, as it is allowable to do, that money remains for the
time an invariable standard, no alteration taking place in the
conditions under which the circulating medium itself is produced or
obtained. If money itself undergoes no variation in cost, the money
price of labour is an exact measure of the Cost of Labour, and may be
made use of as a convenient symbol to express it.

The money wages of labour are a compound result of two elements: first,
real wages, or wages in kind, or in other words, the quantity which the
labourer obtains of the ordinary articles of consumption; and secondly,
the money prices of those articles. In all old countries—all countries
in which the increase of population is in any degree checked by the
difficulty of obtaining subsistence—the habitual money price of labour
is that which will just enable the labourers, one with another, to
purchase the commodities without which they eeither cannot or will not
keep up the population at its customary rate of increasee. Their
standard of comfort being given, (and by the standard of comfort in a
labouring class, is meant that, rather than forego which, they will
abstain from multiplication,) money wages depend on the money price, and
therefore on the cost of production, of the various articles which the
labourers habitually consume: because if their wages cannot procure them
a given quantity of these, their increase will slacken, and their wages
rise. Of these articles, food and other Edition: current; Page: [697]
agricultural produce are so much the principal, as to leave little
influence to anything else.

It is at this point that we are enabled to invoke the aid of the
principles which have been laid down in this Third Part. The cost of
production of food and agricultural produce has been analyzed in a
preceding chapter. It depends on the productiveness of the least fertile
land, or of the least productively employed portion of capital, which
the necessities of society have as yet put in requisition for
agricultural purposes. The cost of production of the food grown in these
least advantageous circumstances, determines, as we have seen, the
exchange value and money price of the whole. In any given state,
therefore, of the flabourers’ habits, theirf money wages depend on the
productiveness of the least fertile land, or least productive
agricultural capital; on the point which cultivation has reached in its
downward progress—in its encroachments on the barren lands, and its
gradually increased strain upon the powers of the more fertile. Now, the
force which urges gcultivation in this downward course, is the increase
of people; while the counter-force which checks the descent, is the
improvement of agricultural science and practice, enabling the same soil
to yield to the same labour more ample returns. The costliness of the
most costly part of the produce of cultivation, is an exact expression
of the state, at any given moment, of the race which population and
agricultural skill are always running against each other.

§ 2. [Exchange and Money make no difference in the law of rent] It is
well said by Dr. Chalmers, that many of the most important lessons in
political economy are to be learnt at the extreme margin of cultivation,
the last point which the culture of the soil has reached in its contest
with the spontaneous agencies of nature. The degree of productiveness of
this extreme margin, is an index to the existing state of the
distribution of the produce among the three classes, of labourers,
capitalists, and landlords.

When the demand of an increasing population for more food cannot be
satisfied without extending cultivation to less fertile land or
incurring additional outlay, with a less proportional return, on land
already in cultivation, it is a necessary condition of this increase of
agricultural produce, that the value and price of that produce must
first rise. But as soon as the price has risen sufficiently to give to
the additional outlay of capital the ordinary profit, the rise will not
go on still further for the purpose of enabling the new land, or the new
expenditure on old land, to yield rent as well as profit. The land or
capital last put in requisition, and occupying what Dr. Chalmers calls
the margin of cultivation, will yield, and Edition: current; Page: [698]
continue to yield, no rent. But if this yields no rent, the rent
afforded by all other land or agricultural capital will be exactly so
much as it produces more than this. The price of food will always on the
average be such, that the worst land, and the least productive
instalment of the capital employed on the better lands, shall just
replace the expenses with the ordinary profit. If the least favoured
land and capital just do thus much, all other land and capital will
yield an extra profit, equal to the proceeds of the extra produce due to
their superior productiveness; and this extra profit becomes, by
competition, the prize of the landlords. Exchange, and money, therefore,
make no difference in the law of rent: it is the same as we originally
found it. Rent is the extra return made to agricultural capital when
employed with peculiar advantages; the exact equivalent of what those
advantages enable the producers to economize in the cost of production:
the value and price of the produce being regulated by the cost of
production to those producers who have no advantages; by the return to
that portion of agricultural capital, the circumstances of which are the
least favourable.

§ 3. [Exchange and Money make no difference in the law of profits] Wages
and Rent being thus regulated by the same principles when paid in money,
as they would be if apportioned in kind, it follows that Profits are so
likewise. For the surplus, after replacing wages and paying rent,
constitutes Profits.

We found in the last chapter of the Second Book, that the advances of
the capitalist, when analyzed to their ultimate elements, consist either
in the purchase or maintenance of labour, or in the profits of former
capitalists; and that therefore profits, in the last resort, depend upon
the Cost of Labour, falling as that rises, and rising as it falls. Let
us endeavour to trace more minutely the operation of this law.

There are two modes in which the Cost of Labour, which is correctly
represented (money being supposed invariable) by the money wages of the
labourer, may be increased. The labourer may obtain greater comforts;
wages in kind—real wages—may rise. Or the progress of population may
force down cultivation to inferior soils, and more costly processes;
thus raising the cost of production, the value, and the price, of the
chief articles of the labourer’s consumption. On either of these
suppositions, the rate of profit will fall.

If the labourer obtains more abundant commodities, only by reason of
their greater cheapness; if he obtains a greater quantity, but not on
the whole a greater cost; areal wages will be increased, but not bmoney
wages, and there will be nothing to affect the rate of profit. But if he
obtains a greater quantity of commodities of which the cost of
production is not Edition: current; Page: [699] lowered, he obtains a
greater cost; his money wages are higher. The expense of these increased
money wages falls wholly on the capitalist. There are no conceivable
means by which he can shake it off. It may be said—it cis, not
unfrequently,c said—that he will get rid of it by raising his price. But
this opinion we have already, and more than once, fully refuted.*

The doctrine, indeed, that a rise of wages causes an equivalent rise of
prices, is, as we formerly observed, self-contradictory: for if it did
so, it would not be a rise of wages; the labourer would get no more of
any commodity than he had before, let his money wages rise ever so much;
a rise of real wages would be an impossibility. This being equally
contrary to reason and to fact, it is evident that a rise of money wages
does not raise prices; that high wages are not a cause of high prices. A
rise of general wages falls on profits. There is no possible
alternative.

Having disposed of the case in which the increase of money wages, and of
the Cost of Labour, arises from the labourer’s obtaining more ample
wages in kind, let us now suppose it to arise from the increased cost of
production of the things which he consumes; owing to an increase of
population, unaccompanied by an equivalent increase of agricultural
skill. The augmented supply required by the population would not be
obtained, unless the price of food rose sufficiently to remunerate the
farmer for the increased cost of production. The farmer, however, in
this case sustains a twofold disadvantage. He has to carry on his
cultivation under less favourable conditions of productiveness than
before. For this, as it is a disadvantage belonging to him only as a
farmer, and not shared by other employers, he will, on the general
principles of value, be compensated by a rise of the price of his
commodity: indeed, until this rise has taken place, he will not bring to
market the required increase of produce. But this very rise of price
involves him in another necessity, for which he is not compensated. dAs
the real wages of labour are by supposition unaltered, hed must pay
higher money wages to his labourers. This necessity, being common to him
with all other capitalists, forms no ground for a rise of price. The
price will rise, until it has placed him in as good a situation in
respect of profits, as other employers of labour: it will rise so as to
indemnify him for the increased labour which he must now employ in order
to produce a given quantity of food: but the increased wages of that
labour are a burthen common to all, and for which no one can be
indemnified. It will be paid wholly from profits.

Thus we see that increased wages, when common to all descriptions of
productive labourers, and when really representing a greater Cost of
Edition: current; Page: [700] Labour, are always and necessarily at the
expense of profits. And by reversing the cases, we should find in like
manner that diminished wages, when representing a really diminished Cost
of Labour, are equivalent to a rise of profits. But the opposition of
pecuniary interest thus indicated between the class of capitalists and
that of labourers, is to a great extent only apparent. Real wages are a
very different thing from the Cost of Labour, and are generally highest
at the times and places where, from the easy terms on which the land
yields all the produce as yet required from it, the value and price of
food being low, the cost of labour to the employer, notwithstanding its
ample remuneration, is comparatively cheap, and the rate of profit
consequently highe. We thus obtain a full confirmation of our original
theorem that Profits depend on the Cost of Labour: or, to express the
meaning with still greater accuracy, the rate of profit and the cost of
labour vary inversely as one another, and are joint effects of the same
agencies or causes.

But does not this proposition require to be slightly modified, by making
allowance for that portion (though comparatively small) of the expenses
of the capitalist, which does not consist in wages paid by himself or
reimbursed to previous capitalists, but in the profits of those previous
capitalists? Suppose, for example, an invention in the manufacture of
leather, the advantage of which should consist in rendering it
unnecessary that the hides should remain for so great a length of time
in the tan-pit. Shoemakers, saddlers, and other workers in leather,
would save a part of that portion of the cost of their material which
consists of the tanner’s profits during the time his capital is locked
up; and this saving, it may be said, is a source from which they might
derive an increase of profit, though wages and the Cost of Labour
remained exactly the same. In the case here supposed, however, the
consumer alone would benefit, since the prices of shoes, harness, and
all other articles into which leather enters, would fall, until the
profits of the producers were reduced to the general level. To obviate
this objection, let us suppose that a similar saving of fexpensef takes
place in all departments of production at once. In that case, since
values and prices would not be affected, profits would probably be
raised; but if we look more closely into the case we shall find, that it
is because the cost of labour would be lowered. In this as in any other
case of increase in the general productiveness of labour, if the
labourer obtained only the same real wages, profits would be raised: but
the same real wages would imply a smaller Cost of Labour; the cost of
production of all things having been, by the supposition, diminished.
If, on the other hand, the real wages of labour rose proportionally, and
the Cost of Labour to the Edition: current; Page: [701] employer
remained the same, the advances of the capitalist would bear the same
ratio to his returns as before, and the rate of profit would be
unaltered. The reader who may wish for a more minute examination of this
point, will find it in the volume of separate Essays to which reference
has before been made.* The question is too intricate in comparison with
its importance, to be further entered into in a work like the present;
and I will merely say, that it seems to result from the considerations
adduced in the Essay, that there is nothing in the case in question to
affect the integrity of the theory which affirms an exact
correspondence, in an inverse direction, between the rate of profit and
the Cost of Labour.

Edition: current; Page: [702] Edition: current; Page: [703]


BOOK IV: INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY ON PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION

Edition: current; Page: [704] Edition: current; Page: [705]


CHAPTER I: General Characteristics of a Progressive State of Wealth

§ 1. [Introductory remarks] The three preceding Parts include as
detailed a view as aour limitsa permit, of what, by a happy
generalization of a mathematical phrase, has been called the Statics of
the subject. We have surveyed the field of economical facts, and have
examined how they stand related to one another as causes and effects;
what circumstances determine the amount of production, of employment for
labour, of capital and population; what laws regulate rent, profits, and
wages; under what conditions and in what proportions commodities are
interchanged between individuals and between countries. We have thus
obtained a collective view of the economical phenomena of society,
considered as existing simultaneously. We have ascertained, to a certain
extent, the principles of their interdependence; and when the state of
some of the elements is known, we should now be able to infer, in a
general way, the contemporaneous state of most of the others. All this,
however, has only put us in possession of the economical laws of a
stationary and unchanging society. We have still to consider the
economical condition of mankind as liable to change, and indeed (in the
more advanced portions of the race, and in all regions to which their
influence reaches) as at all times undergoing progressive changes. We
have to consider what these changes are, what are their laws, and what
their ultimate tendencies; thereby adding a theory of motion to our
theory of equilibrium—the Dynamics of political economy to the Statics.

In this inquiry, it is natural to commence by tracing the operation of
known and acknowledged agencies. Whatever may be the other changes which
the economy of society is destined to undergo, there is one actually in
progress, concerning which there can be no dispute. In the leading
countries of the world, and in all others as they come within the
influence of those leading countries, there is at least one progressive
movement which continues with little interruption from year to year and
from generation to generation; a progress in wealth; an advancement bofb
what is called Edition: current; Page: [706] material prosperity. All
the nations which we are accustomed to call civilized, increase
gradually in production and in population: and there is no reason to
doubt, that not only these nations will for some time continue so to
increase, but that most of the other nations of the world, including
some not yet founded, will successively enter upon the same career. It
will, therefore, be our first object to examine the nature and
consequences of this progressive change; the elements which constitute
it, and the effects it produces on the various economical facts of which
we have been tracing the laws, and especially on wages, profits, rents,
values, and prices.

§ 2. [Tendency of the progress of society towards increased command over
the powers of nature; increased security; and increased capacity of
co-operation] Of the features which characterize this progressive
economical movement of civilized nations, that which first excites
attention, through its intimate connexion with the phenomena of
Production, is the perpetual, and so far as human foresight can extend,
the unlimited, growth of man’s power over nature. Our knowledge of the
properties and laws of physical objects shows no sign of approaching its
ultimate boundaries: it is advancing more rapidly, and in a greater
number of directions at once, than in any previous age or generation,
and affording such frequent glimpses of unexplored fields beyond, as to
justify the belief that our acquaintance with nature is still almost in
its infancy. This increasing physical knowledge is now, too, more
rapidly than at any former period, converted, by practical ingenuity,
into physical power. The most marvellous of modern inventions, one which
realizes the imaginary feats of the magician, not metaphorically but
literally—the electro-magnetic telegraph—aspranga into existence but a
few years after the establishment of the scientific theory which it
realizes and exemplifies. Lastly, the manual part of these great
scientific operations is now never wanting to the intellectual: there is
no difficulty in finding or forming, in a sufficient number of the
working hands of the community, the bskill requisiteb for executing the
most delicate processes of the application of science to practical uses.
From this union of conditions, it is impossible not to look forward to a
vast multiplication and long succession of contrivances for economizing
labour and increasing its produce; and to an ever wider diffusion of the
use and benefit of those contrivances.

Another change, which has always hitherto characterized, and will
assuredly continue to characterize, the progress of civilized society,
is a continual increase of the security of person and property. The
people of every country in Europe, the most backward as well as the most
advanced, Edition: current; Page: [707] are, in each generation, better
protected against the violence and rapacity of one another, both by a
more efficient judicature and police for the suppression of private
crime, and by the decay and destruction of those mischievous privileges
which enabled certain classes of the community to prey with impunity
upon the rest. They are also, in every generation, better protected,
either by institutions or by manners and opinion, against carbitrary
exercise of the power of government. Even in semi-barbarous Russia, acts
of spoliation directed against individuals, who have not made themselves
politically obnoxious, are not dsupposed to bed now so frequent as much
to affect any person’s feelings of security. Taxation, in all European
countries, grows less arbitrary and oppressive, both in itself and in
the manner of levying it. Wars, and the destruction they cause, are now
eusuallye confined, in almost every country, to those distant and
outlying possessions at which it comes into contact with savages. Even
the vicissitudes of fortune which arise from inevitable natural
calamities, are more and more softened to those on whom they fall, by
the continual extension of the salutary practice of insurance.

Of this increased security, one of the most unfailing effects is a great
increase both of production and of accumulation. Industry and frugality
cannot exist, where there is not a preponderant probability that those
who labour and spare will be permitted to enjoy. And the nearer this
probability approaches to fcertainty, the more do industry and frugality
become pervading qualities in a people. Experience has shown that a
large proportion of the results of labour and abstinence may be taken
away by fixed taxation, without impairing, and sometimes even with the
effect of stimulating, the qualities from which a great production and
an abundant capital take their rise. But those qualities are not proof
against a high degree of uncertainty. gThe Governmentg may carry off a
part; but there must be assurance that hith will not interfere, nor
suffer any one to interfere, with the remainder.

One of the changes which most infallibly attend the progress of modern
society, is an improvement in the business capacities of the general
mass of mankind. I do not mean that the practical sagacity of an
individual human being is greater than formerly. I am inclined to
believe that economical progress has hitherto had even a contrary
effect. A person of good natural endowments, in a rude state of society,
can do a igreati number of things jtolerablyj well, has a greater power
of adapting means to ends, is more capable of extricating himself and
others from an unforeseen embarrassment, Edition: current; Page: [708]
than ninety-nine in a hundred of those who have known only kwhat is
calledk the civilized form of life. How far these points of inferiority
of faculties are compensated, and by what means they might be
compensated still more completely, to the civilized man as an individual
being, is a question belonging to a different inquiry from the present.
But to civilized human beings collectively considered, the compensation
is ample. What is lost in the separate lefficiency of each, is far more
than made up by mthem greater capacity of united action. In nproportion
as they put off the qualities of the savage, they become amenable to
discipline; capable of adhering to plans concerted beforehand, and about
which they may not have been consulted; of subordinating their
individual caprice to a preconceived determination, and performing
severally the parts allotted to them in a combined undertaking. Works of
all sorts, impracticable to the savage or the half-civilized, are daily
accomplished by civilized nations, not by any greatness of faculties in
the actual agents, but through the ofact that each is able to rely with
certainty on the others for the portion of the work which they
respectively undertake. The peculiar characteristic, in short, of
civilized beings, is the capacity of co-operation; and this, like other
faculties, tends to improve by practice, and becomes capable of assuming
a constantly wider sphere of action.

Accordingly there is no more certain incident of the progressive change
taking place in society, than the continual growth of the principle and
practice of co-operation. Associations of individuals voluntarily
combining their small contributions, now perform works, both of an
industrial and of many other characters, which no one person or small
number of persons are rich enough to accomplish, or for the performance
of which the few persons capable of accomplishing them were formerly
enabled to exact the most inordinate remuneration. As wealth increases
and business capacity improves, we may look forward to a great extension
of establishments, both for industrial and other purposes, formed by the
collective contributions of large numbers; establishments like those
pcalledp by the technical name of joint-stock companies, or the
associations less formally constituted, which are so numerous in
England, to raise funds for public or philanthropic objectsq, or,
lastly, those associations of workpeople either for production, or to
buy goods for their common consumption, which are now specially known by
the name of co-operative societiesq.

The progress which is to be expected in the physical sciences and arts,
combined with the greater security of property, and greater freedom in
Edition: current; Page: [709] disposing of it, which are obvious
features in the civilization of modern nations, and with the more
extensive and more skilful employment of the joint-stock principle,
afford space and scope for an indefinite increase of capital and
production, and for the increase of population which is its ordinary
accompaniment. That the growth of population will overpass the increase
of production, there is not much reason to apprehend; and that it should
even keep pace with it, is inconsistent with the supposition of any real
improvement in the poorest classes of the people. It is, however, quite
possible that there might be a great progress in industrial improvement,
and in the signs of what is commonly called national prosperity; a great
increase of aggregate wealth, and even, in some respects, a better
distribution of it; that not only the rich might grow richer, but many
of the poor might grow rich, that the intermediate classes might become
more numerous and powerful, and the means of enjoyable existence be more
and more largely diffused, while yet the great class at the base of the
whole might increase in numbers only, and not in comfort nor in
cultivation. We must, therefore, in considering the effects of the
progress of industry, admit as a supposition, however greatly we
deprecate as a fact, an increase of population as long-continued, as
indefinite, and possibly even as rapid, as the increase of production
and accumulation.

With these preliminary observations on the causes of change at work in a
society which is in a state of economical progress, I proceed to a more
detailed examination of the changes themselves.

Edition: current; Page: [710]


CHAPTER II: Influence of the Progress of Industry and Population on Values and Prices

§ 1. [Tendency to a decline of the value and cost of production of all
commodities] The changes which the progress of industry causes or
presupposes in the circumstances of production, are necessarily attended
with changes in the values of commodities.

The permanent values of all things which are neither under a natural nor
under an artificial monopoly, depend, as we have seen, on their cost of
production. But the increasing power which mankind are constantly
acquiring over nature, increases more and more the efficiency of human
exertion, or in other words, diminishes cost of production. All
inventions by which a greater quantity of any commodity can be produced
with the same labour, or the same quantity with less labour, or which
abridge the process, so that the capital employed needs not be advanced
for so long a time, lessen the cost of production of the commodity. As,
however, value is relative; if inventions and improvements in production
were made in all commodities, and all in the same degree, there would be
no alteration in values. Things would continue to exchange for each
other at the same rates as before; and mankind would obtain a greater
quantity of all things in return for their labour and abstinence,
without having that greater abundance measured and declared (as it is
when it affects only one thing) by the diminished exchange value of the
commodity.

As for prices, in these circumstances they would be affected or not,
according as the improvements in production did or did not extend to the
precious metals. If the materials of money were an exception to the
general diminution of cost of production, the values of all other things
would fall in relation to money, that is there would be a fall of
general prices throughout the world. But if money, like other things,
and in the same degree as other things, were obtained in greater
abundance and cheapness, prices would be no more affected than values
would: and there would Edition: current; Page: [711] be no visible sign
in the state of the markets, of any of the changes which had taken
place; except that there would be (if people continued to labour as much
as before) a greater quantity of all sorts of commodities, circulated at
the same prices by a greater quantity of money.

Improvements in production are not the only circumstance accompanying
the progress of industry, which tends to diminish the cost of producing,
or at least of obtaining, commodities. Another circumstance is the
increase of intercourse between different parts of the world. As
commerce extends, and the ignorant attempts to restrain it by tariffs
become obsolete, commodities tend more and more to be produced in the
places in which their production can be carried on at the least expense
of labour and capital to mankind. As civilization spreads, and security
of person and property becomes established, in parts of the world which
have not hitherto had that advantage, the productive capabilities of
those places are called into fuller activity, for the benefit both of
their own inhabitants and of foreigners. The ignorance and misgovernment
in which many of the regions most favoured by nature are still
grovelling, afford work, probably, for many generations before those
countries awilla be raised even to the present level of the most
civilized parts of Europe. Much will also depend on the increasing
migration of labour and capital to unoccupied parts of the earth, of
which the soil, climate, and situation are found, by the ample means of
exploration now possessed, to promise not only a large return to
industry, but great facilities of producing commodities suited to the
markets of old countries. Much as the collective industry of the earth
is likely to be increased in efficiency by the extension of science and
of the industrial arts, a still more active source of increased
cheapness of production will be found, probably, for some time to come,
in the gradually unfolding consequences of Free Trade, and in the
increasing scale on which Emigration and Colonization will be carried
on.

From the causes now enumerated, unless counteracted by others, the
progress of things enables a country to obtain at less and less of real
cost, not only its own productions but those of foreign countries.
Indeed, whatever diminishes the cost of its own productions, when of an
exportable character, enables it, as we have already seen, to obtain its
imports at less real cost.

§ 2. [Tendency to a decline of the value and cost of production of all
commodities except the products of agriculture and mining, which have a
tendency to rise] But is it the fact, that these tendencies are not
counteracted? Has the progress of wealth and industry no effect in
regard to cost of production, but to diminish it? Are no causes of an
opposite character Edition: current; Page: [712] brought into operation
by the same progress, sufficient in some cases not only to neutralize,
but to overcome the former, and convert the descending movement of cost
of production into an ascending movement? We are already aware that
there are such causes, and that, in the case of the most important
classes of commodities, food and materials, there is a tendency
diametrically opposite to that of which we have been speaking. The cost
of production of these commodities tends to increase.

This is not a property inherent in the commodities themselves. If
population were stationary, and the produce of the earth never needed to
be augmented in quantity, there would be no cause for greater cost of
production. Mankind would, on the contrary, have the full benefit of all
improvements in agriculture, or in the arts subsidiary to it, and there
would be no difference, in this respect, between the products of
agriculture and those of manufactures. aThe only products of industry,
which, if population did not increase, would be liable to a real
increase of cost of production, are those which, depending on a material
which is not renewed, are either wholly or partially exhaustible; such
as coal, and most if not all metals; for even iron, the most abundant as
well as most useful of metallic products, which forms an ingredient of
most minerals and of almost all rocks, is susceptible of exhaustion so
far as regards its richest and most tractable ores.

When, however, population increases, as it has never yet failed to do
when the increase of industry and of the means of subsistence bmadeb
room for it, the demand for most of the productions of the earth, and
particularly for food, increases in a corresponding proportion. And then
comes into effect that fundamental law of production from the soil, on
which we have so frequently had occasion to expatiate; the law, that
increased labour, in any given state of agricultural skill, is attended
with a less than proportional increase of produce. The cost of
production of the fruits of the earth increases, cæteris paribus, with
every increase of the demand.

No tendency of a like kind exists with respect to manufactured articles.
The tendency is in the contrary direction. The larger the scale on which
manufacturing operations are carried on, the more cheaply they can in
general be performed. Mr. Senior has gone the length of enunciating as
an inherent law of manufacturing industry, that in it increased
production takes place at a smaller cost, while in agricultural industry
increased production takes place at a greater cost. I cannot think,
however, that even Edition: current; Page: [713] in manufactures,
increased cheapness follows increased production by anything amounting
to a law. It is a probable and usual, but not a necessary, consequence.

As manufactures, however, depend for their materials either upon
agriculture, or mining, or the spontaneous produce of the earth,
manufacturing industry is subject, in respect of one of its essentials,
to the same law as agriculture. But the crude material generally forms
so small a portion of the total cost, that any tendency which may exist
to a progressive increase in that single item, is much over-balanced by
the diminution continually taking place in all the other elements; to
which diminution it is impossible at present to assign any limit.

The tendency, then, being to a perpetual increase of the productive
power of labour in manufactures, while in agriculture and mining there
is a conflict between two tendencies, the one towards an increase of
productive power, the other towards a diminution of it, the cost of
production being lessened by every improvement in the cprocessesc, and
augmented by every addition to population; it follows that the exchange
values of manufactured articles, compared with the products of
agriculture and of mines, have, as population and industry advance, a
certain and decided tendency to fall. Money being a product of mines, it
may also be laid down as a rule, that manufactured articles tend, as
society advances, to fall in money price. The industrial history of
modern nations, especially during the last hundred years, fully bears
out this assertion.

§ 3. [That tendency from time to time is counteracted by improvements in
production] Whether agricultural produce increases in absolute as well
as comparative cost of production, depends on the conflict of the two
antagonist agencies, increase of population, and improvement in
agricultural skill. In some, perhaps in most, states of society,
(looking at the whole surface of the earth,) both agricultural skill and
population are either stationary, or increase very slowly, and the cost
of production of food, therefore, is nearly stationary. In a society
which is advancing in wealth, population generally increases faster than
agricultural skill, and food consequently tends to become more costly;
but there are times when a strong impulse sets in towards agricultural
improvement. Such an impulse has shown itself in Great Britain during
the last atwenty or thirtya years. In England and Scotland agricultural
skill has of late increased considerably faster than population,
insomuch that food and other agricultural produce, notwithstanding the
increase of people, can be grown at less cost than they were thirty
years ago: and the abolition of the Corn Laws has given Edition:
current; Page: [714] an additional stimulus to the spirit of
improvement. In some other countries, and particularly in France, the
improvement of agriculture gains ground still more decidedly upon
population, because though agriculture, except in a few provinces,
advances slowly, population advances still more slowly, and even with
increasing slowness; its growth being kept down, not by poverty, which
is diminishing, but by prudence.

Which of the two conflicting agencies is gaining upon the other at any
particular time, might be conjectured with tolerable accuracy from the
money price of agricultural produce (supposing bullion not to vary
materially in value), provided a sufficient number of years could be
taken, to form an average independent of the fluctuations of seasons.
This, however, is hardly practicable, since Mr. Tooke has shown that
even so long a period as half a century may include a much greater
proportion of abundant and a smaller of deficient seasons than is
properly due to it. A mere average, therefore, might lead to conclusions
only the more misleading, for their deceptive semblance of accuracy.
There would be less danger of error in taking the average of only a
small number of years, and correcting it by a conjectural allowance for
the character of the seasons, than in trusting to a longer average
without any such correction. It is hardly necessary to add, that in
founding conclusions on quoted prices, allowance must also be made as
far as possible for any changes in the general exchange value of the
precious metals.*

§ 4. [Effect of the progress of society in moderating fluctuations of
value] Thus far, of the effect of the progress of society on the
permanent or average values and prices of commodities. It remains to be
considered, in what manner the same progress affects their fluctuations.
Concerning the answer to this question there can be no doubt. It tends
in a very high degree to diminish them.

In poor and backward societies, as in the East, and in Europe during the
Middle Ages, extraordinary differences in the price of the same
commodity might exist in places not very distant from each other,
because the want of roads and canals, the imperfection of marine
navigation, and the insecurity of communications generally, prevented
things from being transported from the places where they were cheap to
those where they were dear. The things most liable to fluctuations in
value, those directly influenced by the seasons, and especially food,
were seldom carried to any great distances. Each locality depended, as a
general rule, on its own produce and that of its immediate
neighbourhood. In most years, Edition: current; Page: [715] accordingly,
there was, in some part or other of any large country, a real dearth.
Almost every season must be unpropitious to some among the many soils
and climates to be found in an extensive tract of country; but as the
same season is also in general more than ordinarily favourable to
others, it is only occasionally that the aggregate produce of the whole
country is deficient, and even then in a less degree than that of many
separate portions; while a deficiency at all considerable, extending to
the whole world, is a thing almost unknown. In modern times, therefore,
there is only dearth, where there formerly would have been famine, and
sufficiency everywhere when anciently there would have been scarcity in
some places and superfluity in others.

The same change has taken place with respect to all other articles of
commerce. The safety and cheapness of communications, which enable a
deficiency in one place to be supplied from the surplus of another, at a
moderate or even a small advance on the ordinary price, render the
fluctuations of prices much less extreme than formerly. This effect is
much promoted by the existence of large capitals, belonging to what are
called speculative merchants, whose business it is to buy goods in order
to aresella them at a profit. These dealers naturally buying things when
they are cheapest, and storing them up to be brought again into the
market when the price has become unusually high; the tendency of their
operations is to equalize price, or at least to moderate its
inequalities. The prices of things are neither so much depressed at one
time, nor so much raised at another, as they would be if speculative
dealers did not exist.

Speculators, therefore, have a highly useful office in the economy of
society; and (contrary to common opinion) the most useful portion of the
class are those who speculate in commodities affected by the
vicissitudes of seasons. If there were no corn-dealers, not only would
the price of corn be liable to variations much more extreme than at
present, but in a deficient season the necessary supplies might not be
forthcoming at all. Unless there were speculators in corn, or unless, in
default of dealers, the farmers became speculators, the price in a
season of abundance would fall without any limit or check, except the
wasteful consumption that would invariably follow. That any part of the
surplus of one year remains to supply the deficiency of another, is
owing either to farmers who withhold corn from the market, or to dealers
who buy it when at the cheapest and lay it up in store.

§ 5. [Examination of the influence of speculators, and in particular of
corn-dealers] Among persons who have not much considered the subject,
there is a notion that the gains of speculators are often made by
causing Edition: current; Page: [716] an artificial scarcity; that they
create a high price by their own purchases, and then profit by it. This
may easily be shown to be fallacious. If a corn-dealer makes purchases
on speculation, and produces a rise, when there is neither at the time
nor afterwards any cause for a rise of price except his own proceedings;
he no doubt appears to grow richer as long as his purchases continue,
because he is a holder of an article which is quoted at a higher and
higher price: but this apparent gain only seems within his reach so long
as he does not attempt to realize it. If he has bought, for instance, a
million of quarters, and by withholding them from the market, has raised
the price ten shillings a quarter; just so much as the price has been
raised by withdrawing a million quarters, will it be lowered by bringing
them back, and the best that he can hope is that he will lose nothing
except interest and his expenses. If by a gradual and cautious sale he
is able to realize, on some portion of his stores, a part of the
increased price, so also he will undoubtedly have had to pay aa part ofa
that price on some portion of his purchases. He runs considerable risk
of incurring a still greater loss; for the temporary high price is very
likely to have tempted others, who had no share in causing it, and who
might otherwise not have found their way to bhisb market at all, to
bring their corn there, and intercept a part of the advantage. So that
instead of profiting by a scarcity caused by himself, he is by no means
unlikely, after buying in an average market, to be forced to sell in a
superabundant one.

As an individual speculator cannot gain by a rise of price solely of his
own creating, so neither can a number of speculators gain collectively
by a rise which their operations have artificially produced. Some among
a number of speculators may gain, by superior judgment cor good fortunec
in selecting the time for realizing, but they make this gain at the
expense, not of the consumer, but of the other speculators who are less
judicious. They, in fact, convert to their own benefit the high price
produced by the speculations of the others, leaving to these the loss
resulting from the recoil. It is not to be denied, therefore, that
speculators may enrich themselves by other people’s loss. But it is by
the losses of other speculators. As much must have been lost by one set
of dealers as is gained by another set.

When a speculation in a commodity proves profitable to the speculators
as a body, it is because, in the interval between their buying and
reselling, the price rises from some cause independent of them, their
only connexion with it consisting in having foreseen it. In this case,
their purchases make the price begin to rise sooner than it otherwise
would do, thus spreading the privation of the consumers over a longer
period, but mitigating it at the time of its greatest height: evidently
to the general advantage. In this, Edition: current; Page: [717]
however, it is assumed that they have not overrated the rise which they
looked forward to. For it often happens that speculative purchases are
made in the expectation of some increase of demand, or deficiency of
supply, which after all does not occur, or not to the extent which the
speculator expected. In that case the speculation, instead of moderating
dfluctuationd, has caused a fluctuation of price which otherwise would
not have happened, or aggravated one which would. But in that case, the
speculation is a losing one, to the speculators collectively, however
much some individuals may gain by it. All that part of the rise of price
by which it exceeds what there are independent grounds for, cannot give
to the speculators as a body any benefit, since the price is as much
depressed by their sales as it was raised by their purchases; and while
they gain nothing by it, they lose, not only their trouble and expenses,
but almost always much more, through the effects incident to the
artificial rise of price, in checking consumption, and bringing forward
supplies from unforeseen quarters. The operations, therefore, of
speculative dealers, are useful to the public whenever profitable to
themselves; and though they are sometimes injurious to the public, by
heightening the fluctuations which their more usual office is to
alleviate, yet whenever this happens the speculators are the greatest
losers. The interest, in short, of the speculators as a body, coincides
with the interest of the public; and as they can only fail to serve the
public interest in proportion as they miss their own, the best way to
promote the one is to leave them to pursue the other in perfect freedom.

I do not deny that speculators may aggravate a local scarcity. In
collecting corn from the villages to supply the towns, they make the
dearth penetrate into nooks and corners which might otherwise have
escaped from bearing their share of it. To buy and resell in the same
place, tends to alleviate scarcity; to buy in one place and resell in
another, may increase it in the former of the two places, but relieves
it in the latter, where the price is higher, and which, therefore, by
the very supposition, is likely to be suffering more. And these
sufferings always fall hardest on the poorest consumers, since the rich,
by outbidding, can obtain their accustomed esupplye undiminished if they
choose. To no persons, therefore, are the operations of corn-dealers on
the whole so beneficial as to the poor. Accidentally and exceptionally,
the poor may suffer from them: it might sometimes be more advantageous
to the rural poor to have corn cheap in winter, when they are entirely
dependent on it, even if the consequence were a dearth in spring, when
they can perhaps obtain partial substitutes. But there are no
substitutes, procurable at that season, which serve in any great degree
to replace bread-corn as the chief article of food: if there Edition:
current; Page: [718] were, its price would fall in the spring, instead
of continuing, as it always does, to rise till the approach of harvest.

There is an opposition of immediate interest, at the moment of sale,
between the dealer in corn and the consumer, as there always is between
the seller and the buyer: and a time of dearth being that in which the
speculator makes his largest profits, he is an object of dislike and
jealousy at that time, to those who are suffering while he is gaining.
It is an error, however, to suppose that the corn-dealer’s business
affords him any extraordinary profit: he makes his gains not constantly,
but at particular times, and they must therefore occasionally be great,
but the chances of profit in a business in which there is so much
competition, cannot on the whole be greater than in other employments. A
year of scarcity, in which great gains are made by corn-dealers, rarely
comes to an end without a recoil which places many of them in the list
of bankrupts. There have been few more promising seasons for
corn-dealers than the year 1847, and seldom was there a greater break-up
among the speculators than in the autumn of that year. The chances of
failure, in this most precarious trade, are a set off against great
occasional profits. If the corn-dealer were to sell his stores, during a
dearth, at a lower price than that which the competition of the
consumers assigns to him, he would make a sacrifice, to charity or
philanthropy, of the fair profits of his employment, which may be quite
as reasonably required from any other person of equal means. His
business being a useful one, it is the interest of the public that the
ordinary motives should exist for carrying it on, and that neither law
nor opinion should prevent an operation beneficial to the public from
being attended with as much private advantage as is compatible with full
and free competition.

It appears, then, that the fluctuations of values and prices arising
from variations of supply, or from alterations in real (as distinguished
from speculative) demand, may be expected to become more moderate as
society advances. With regard to those which arise from miscalculation,
and especially from the alternations of undue expansion and excessive
contraction of credit, which occupy so conspicuous a place among
commercial phenomena, the same thing cannot be affirmed with equal
confidence. Such vicissitudes, beginning with irrational speculation and
ending with a commercial crisis, have not hitherto become either less
frequent or less violent with the growth of capital and extension of
industry. Rather they may be said to have become more so: in
consequence, as is often said, of increased competition; but, as I
prefer to say, of a low rate of profits and interest, which fmakesf
capitalists dissatisfied with the ordinary course of safe mercantile
gains. The connexion of this low rate of profit with the advance of
population and accumulation, is one of the points to be illustrated in
the ensuing chapters.

Edition: current; Page: [719]


CHAPTER III: Influence of the Progress of Industry and Population, on Rents, Profits, and Wages

§ 1. [First case; population increasing, capital stationary] Continuing
the inquiry into the nature of the economical changes taking place in a
society which is in a state of industrial progress, we shall next
consider what is the effect of that progress on the distribution of the
produce among the various classes awhoa share in it. We may confine our
attention to the system of distribution which is the most complex, and
which virtually includes all others—that in which the produce of
manufactures is shared between two classes, labourers and capitalists,
and the produce of agriculture among three, labourers, capitalists, and
landlords.

The characteristic features of what is commonly meant by industrial
progress, resolve themselves mainly into three, increase of capital,
increase of population, and improvements in production; understanding
the last expression in its widest sense, to include the process of
procuring commodities from a distance, as well as that of producing
them. The other changes which take place are chiefly consequences of
these; as, for example, the tendency to a progressive increase of the
cost of production of food; barisingb from an increased demand, cwhich
may bec occasioned either by increased population, or by an increase of
capital and wages, enabling the poorer classes to increase their
consumption. It will be convenient to set out by considering each of the
three causes, as operating separately; after which we can suppose them
combined in any manner we think fit.

Let us first suppose that population increases, capital and the arts of
production remaining stationary. One of the effects of this change of
circumstances is sufficiently obvious: wages will fall; the labouring
class will be reduced to an inferior condition. The state of the
capitalist, on the contrary, will be improved. With the same capital, he
can purchase more labour, and obtain more produce. His rate of profit is
increased. The Edition: current; Page: [720] dependence of the rate of
profits on the cost of labour is here verified; for the labourer
obtaining a diminished quantity of commodities, and no alteration being
supposed in the circumstances of their production, the diminished
quantity represents a diminished cost. The labourer obtains not only a
smaller real reward, but the product of a smaller quantity of labour.
The first circumstance is the important one to himself, the last to his
employer.

Nothing has occurred, thus far, to affect in any way the value of any
commodity; and no reason, therefore, has yet shown itself, why rent
should be either raised or lowered. But if we look forward another stage
in the series of effects, we may see our way to such a consequence. The
labourers have increased in numbers: their condition is reduced in the
same proportion; the increased numbers divide among them only the
produce of the same amount of labour as before. But they may economize
in their other comforts, and not in their food: each may consume as much
food, and of as costly a quality as previously; or they may submit to a
reduction, but not in proportion to the increase of numbers. On this
supposition, notwithstanding the diminution of real wages, the increased
population will require an increased quantity of food. But since
industrial skill and knowledge are supposed to be stationary, more food
can only be obtained by resorting to worse land, or to methods of
cultivation which are less productive in proportion to the outlay.
Capital for this extension of agriculture will not be wanting; for
though, by hypothesis, no addition takes place to the capital in
existence, a sufficient amount can be spared from the industry which
previously supplied the other and less pressing wants which the
labourers have been obliged to curtail. The additional supply of food,
therefore, will be produced, but produced at a greater cost; and the
exchange value of agricultural produce must rise. It may be objected,
that profits having risen, the extra cost of producing food can be
defrayed from profits, without any increase of price. It could,
undoubtedly, but it will notd; becaused if it did, the agriculturist
would be placed in an inferior position to other capitalists. The
increase of profits, being the effect of diminished wages, is common to
all employers of labour. The increased expenses arising from the
necessity of a more costly cultivation, affect the agriculturist alone.
For this peculiar burthen he must be peculiarly compensated, whether the
general rate of profit be high or low. He will not submit indefinitely
to a deduction from his profits, to which other capitalists are not
subject. He will not extend his cultivation by laying out fresh capital,
unless for a return sufficient to yield him as high a profit as could be
obtained by the same capital in other investments. The value, therefore,
of his commodity will rise, and rise in proportion to the increased
cost. The farmer will thus be indemnified for the burthen which is
peculiar to Edition: current; Page: [721] himself, and will also enjoy
the augmented rate of profit which is common to all capitalists.

It follows, from principles with which we are already familiar, that in
these circumstances rent will rise. Any land can afford to pay, and
under free competition will pay, a rent equal to the excess of its
produce above the return to an equal capital on the worst land, or under
the least favourable conditions. Whenever, therefore, agriculture is
driven to descend to worse land, or more onerous processes, rent rises.
Its rise will be twofold, for, in the first place, rent in kind, or corn
rent, will rise; and in the second, since the value of agricultural
produce has also risen, rent, estimated in manufactured or foreign
commodities (which is represented, cæteris paribus, by money rent) will
rise still more.

The steps of the process (if, after what has been formerly said, it is
necessary to retrace them) are as follows. Corn rises in price, to repay
with the ordinary profit the capital required for producing additional
corn on worse land or by more costly processes. So far as regards this
additional corn, the increased price is but an equivalent for the
additional expense; but the rise, extending to all corn, affords on all,
except the last produced, an extra profit. If the farmer was accustomed
to produce 100 quarters of wheat at 40s., and 120 quarters are now
required, of which the last twenty cannot be produced under 45s., he
obtains the extra five shillings on the entire 120 quarters, and not on
the last twenty alone. He has thus an extra 25l. beyond the ordinary
profits, and this, in a state of free competition, he will not be able
to retain. He cannot however be compelled to give it up to the consumer,
since a less price than 45s. would be inconsistent with the production
of the last twenty quarters. The price, then, will remain at 45s., and
the 25l. will be transferred by competition not to the consumer but to
the landlord. A rise of erentse is therefore inevitably consequent on an
increased demand for agricultural produce, when unaccompanied by
increased facilities for its production. A truth which, after this final
illustration, fwe may henceforthf take for granted.

The new element now introduced—an increased demand for food—besides
occasioning an increase of rent, still further disturbs the distribution
of the produce between capitalists and labourers. The increase of
population will have diminished the reward of labour: and if its cost
gisg diminished as greatly as its real remuneration, profits will be
increased by the full amount. If, however, the increase of population
leads to an increased production of food, which cannot be supplied but
at an enhanced cost of production, the cost of labour will not be so
much diminished as the real reward of it, and profits, therefore, will
not be so much raised. It Edition: current; Page: [722] is even possible
that they might not be raised at all. The labourers may previously have
been so well provided for, that the whole of what they now lose may be
struck off from their other indulgences, and they may not, either by
necessity or choice, undergo any reduction in the quantity or quality of
their food. To produce the food for the increased number may be attended
with such an increase of expense, that wages, though reduced in
quantity, may represent as great a cost, may be the product of as much
labour, as before, and the capitalist may not be at all benefited. On
this supposition the loss to the labourer is partly absorbed in the
additional labour required for producing the last instalment of
agricultural produce; and the remainder is gained by the landlord, the
only sharer who always benefits by an increase of population.

§ 2. [Second case; capital increasing, population stationary] Let us now
reverse our hypothesis, and instead of supposing capital stationary and
population advancing, let us suppose capital advancing and population
stationary; the facilities of production, both natural and acquired,
being, as before, unaltered. The real wages of labour, instead of
falling, will now rise; and since the cost of production of the things
consumed by the labourer is not diminished, this rise of wages implies
an equivalent increase of the cost of labour, and diminution of profits.
To state the same deduction in other terms; the labourers not being more
numerous, and the productive power of their labour being only the same
as before, there is no increase of the produce; the increase of wages,
therefore, must be at the charge of the capitalist. It is not impossible
that the cost of labour might be increased in even a greater ratio than
its real remuneration. The improved condition of the labourers may
increase the demand for food. The labourers may have been so ill off
before, as not to have food enough; and may now consume more: or they
may choose to expend their increased means partly or wholly in a more
costly quality of food, requiring more labour and more land; wheat, for
example, instead of oats, or potatoes. This extension of agriculture
implies, as usual, a greater cost of production and a higher price, so
that besides the increase of the cost of labour arising from the
increase of its reward, there will be a further increase (and an
additional fall of profits) from the increased costliness of the
commodities of which that reward consists. The same causes will produce
a rise of rent. What the capitalists lose, above what the labourers
gain, is partly transferred to the landlord, and partly swallowed up in
the cost of growing food on worse land or by a less productive process.

§ 3. [Third case; population and capital increasing equally, the arts of
production stationary] Having disposed of the two simple cases, an
Edition: current; Page: [723] increasing population and stationary
capital, and an increasing capital and stationary population, we are
prepared to take into consideration the mixed case, in which the two
elements of expansion are combined, both population and capital
increasing. If either element increases faster than the other, the case
is so far assimilated with one or other of the two preceding: we shall
suppose them, therefore, to increase with equal rapidity; the test of
equality being, that each labourer obtains the same commodities as
before, and the same quantity of those commodities. Let us examine what
will be the effect, on rent and profits, of this double progress.

Population having increased, without any falling off in the alabourer’sa
condition, there is of course a demand for more food. The arts of
production being supposed stationary, this food must be produced at an
increased cost. To compensate for this greater cost of the additional
food, the price of agricultural produce must rise. The rise extending
over the whole amount of food produced, though the increased expenses
only apply to a part, there is a greatly increased extra profit, which,
by competition, is transferred to the landlord. Rent will rise both in
quantity of produce and in cost; while wages, being supposed to be the
same in quantity, will be greater in cost. The labourer obtaining the
same amount of necessaries, money wages have risen; and as the rise is
common to all branches of production, the capitalist cannot indemnify
himself by changing his employment, and the loss must be borne by
profits.

It appears, then, that the tendency of an increase of capital and
population is to add to rent at the expense of profits: though rent does
not gain all that profits lose, a part being absorbed in increased
expenses of production, that is, in hiring or feeding a greater number
of labourers to obtain a given amount of agricultural produce. By
profits, must of course be understood the rate of profit; for a lower
rate of profit on a larger capital may yield a larger pross profit,
considered absolutely, though a smaller in proportion to the entire
produce.

This tendency of profits to fall, is from time to time counteracted by
improvements in production: whether arising from increase of knowledge,
or from an increased use of the knowledge already possessed. This is the
third of the three elements, the effects of which on the distribution of
the produce we undertook to investigate; and the investigation will be
facilitated by supposing, as in the case of the other two elements, that
it operates, in the first instance, alone.

§ 4. [Fourth case; the arts of production progressive, capital and
population stationary] Let us then suppose capital and population
stationary, and a sudden improvement made in the arts of production; by
the invention Edition: current; Page: [724] of more efficient machines,
or less costly processes, or by obtaining access to cheaper commodities
through foreign trade.

The improvement may either be in some of the necessaries or indulgences
which enter into the habitual consumption of the labouring class; or it
may be applicable only to luxuries consumed exclusively by richer
people. Very few, however, of the great industrial improvements are
altogether of this last description. Agricultural improvements, except
such as specially relate to some of the rarer and more peculiar
products, act directly upon the principal objects of the labourer’s
expenditure. The steam-engine, and every other invention which affords a
manageable power, are applicable to all things, and of course to those
consumed by the labourer. Even the power-loom and the spinning-jenny,
though applied to the most delicate fabrics, are available no less for
the coarse cottons and woollens worn by the labouring class. All
improvements in locomotion cheapen the transport of necessaries as well
as of luxuries. Seldom is a new branch of trade opened, without, either
directly or in some indirect way, causing some of the articles which the
mass of the people consume to be either produced or imported at smaller
cost. It may safely be affirmed, therefore, that improvements in
production generally tend to cheapen the commodities on which the wages
of the labouring class are expended.

In so far as the commodities affected by an improvement are those which
the labourers generally do not consume, the improvement has no effect in
altering the distribution of the produce. Those particular commodities,
indeed, are cheapened; being produced at less cost, they fall in value
and in price, and all who consume them, whether landlords, capitalists,
or skilled and privileged labourers, obtain increased means of
enjoyment. The rate of profits, however, is not raised. There is a
larger gross profit, reckoned in quantity of commodities. But the
capital also, if estimated in those commodities, has risen in value. The
profit is the same percentage on the capital that it was before. The
capitalists are not benefited as capitalists, but as consumers. The
landlords and the privileged aclassesa of labourers, if they are
consumers of the same commodities, share the same benefit.

The case is different with improvements which diminish the cost of
production of the necessaries of life, or of commodities which enter
habitually into the consumption of the great mass of labourers. The play
of the different forces being here rather complex, it is necessary to
analyse it with some minuteness.

As formerly observed,* there are two kinds of agricultural improvements.
Some consist in a mere saving of labour, and enable a given Edition:
current; Page: [725] quantity of food to be produced at less cost, but
not on a smaller surface of land than before. Others enable a given
extent of land to yield not only the same produce with less labour, but
a greater produce; so that if no greater produce is required, a part of
the land already under culture may be dispensed with. As the part
rejected will be the least productive portion, the market will
thenceforth be regulated by a better description of land than what was
previously the worst under cultivation.

To place the effect of the improvement in a clear light, we must suppose
it to take place suddenly, so as to leave no time during its
introduction, for any increase of capital or of population. Its first
effect will be a fall of the value and price of agricultural produce.
This is a necessary consequence of either kind of improvement, but
especially of the last.

An improvement of the first kind, not increasing the produce, does not
dispense with any portion of the land; the margin of cultivation (as Dr.
Chalmers terms it) remains where it was; agriculture does not recede,
either in extent of cultivated land, or in elaborateness of bmethodb:
and the price continues to be regulated by the same land, and by the
same capital, as before. But since that land or capital, and all other
land or capital which produces food, now yields its produce at smaller
cost, the price of food will fall proportionally. If one-tenth of the
expense of production has been saved, the price of produce will fall
one-tenth.

But suppose the improvement to be of the second kind; enabling the land
to produce, not only the same corn with one-tenth less labour, but a
tenth more corn with the same labour. Here the effect is still more
decided. Cultivation can now be contracted, and the market supplied from
a smaller quantity of land. Even if this smaller surface of land were of
the same average quality as the larger surface, the price would fall
one-tenth, because the same produce would be obtained with a tenth less
labour. But since the portion of land abandoned will be the least
fertile portion, the price of produce will thenceforth be regulated by a
better quality of land than before. In addition, therefore, to the
original diminution of one-tenth in the cost of production, there will
be a further diminution, corresponding with the recession of the
“margin” of agriculture to land of greater fertility. There will thus be
a twofold fall of price.

Let us now examine the effect of the improvements, thus suddenly made,
on the division of the produce; and in the first place, on rent. By the
former of the two kinds of improvement, rent would be diminished. By the
second, it would be diminished still more.

Suppose that the demand for food requires the cultivation of three
qualities of land, yielding, on an equal surface, and at an equal
expense, 100, 80, and 60 bushels of wheat. The price of wheat will, on
the average, Edition: current; Page: [726] be just sufficient to enable
the third quality to be cultivated with the ordinary profit. The first
quality therefore will yield forty and the second twenty bushels of
extra profit, constituting the rent of the landlord. And first, let an
improvement be made, which, without enabling more corn to be grown,
enables the same corn to be grown with one-fourth less labour. The price
of wheat will fall one-fourth, and 80 bushels will be sold for the price
for which 60 were sold before. But the produce of the land which
produces 60 bushels is still required, and the expenses being as much
reduced as the price, that land can still be cultivated with the
ordinary profit. The first and second qualities will therefore continue
to yield a surplus of 40 and 20 bushels, and corn rent will remain the
same as before. But corn having fallen in price one-fourth, the same
corn rent is equivalent to a fourth less of money and of all other
commodities. So far, therefore, as the landlord expends his income in
manufactured or foreign products, he is one-fourth worse off than
before. His income as landlord is reduced to three-quarters of its
amount: it is only as a consumer of corn that he is as well off.

If the improvement is of the other kind, rent will fall in a still
greater ratio. Suppose that the amount of produce which the market
requires, can be grown not only with a fourth less labour, but on a
fourth less cland. If all the land already in cultivation continued to
be cultivated, it would yield a produce much larger than necessary.
Land, equivalent to a fourth of the produce, must now be abandoned: and
as the third quality yielded exactly one-fourth, (being 60 out of 240,)
that quality will go out of cultivation. The 240 bushels can now be
grown on land of the first and second qualities only; being, on the
first, 100 bushels plus one-third, or 133⅓ bushels; on the second, 80
bushels plus one-third, or 106⅔ bushels; together 240. The second
quality of land, instead of the third, is now the lowest, and regulates
the price. Instead of 60, it is sufficient if 106⅔ bushels repay the
capital with the ordinary profit. The price of wheat will consequently
fall, not in the ratio of 60 to 80, as in the other case, but in the
ratio of 60 to 106⅔. Even this gives an insufficient idea of the degree
in which rent will be affected. The whole produce of the second quality
of land will now be required to repay the expenses of production. That
land, being the worst in cultivation, will pay no rent. And the first
quality will only yield the difference between 133⅓ bushels and 106⅔,
being 26⅔ bushels instead of 40. The landlords collectively will have
lost 33⅓ out of 60 bushels in corn rent alone, while the value and price
of what is left will have been diminished in the ratio of 60 to 106⅔.

It thus appears, that the interest of the landlord is decidedly hostile
to the sudden and general introduction of agricultural improvements.
This assertion has been called a paradox, and made a ground for accusing
its Edition: current; Page: [727] first promulgator, Ricardo, of great
intellectual perverseness, to say nothing worse. I cannot discern in
what the paradox consists; and the obliquity of vision seems to me to be
on the side of his assailants. The opinion is only made to appear absurd
by stating it unfairly. If the assertion were that a landlord is injured
by the improvement of his estate, it would certainly be indefensible;
but what is asserted is, that he is injured by the improvement of the
estates of other people, although his own is included. Nobody doubts
that he would gain greatly by the improvement if he could keep it to
himself, and unite the dtwod benefits, ean increased produce from his
fland, and a price as high as before. But if the increase of produce
took place simultaneously on all lands, the price would not be as high
as before; and there is nothing unreasonable in supposing that the
landlords would be, not benefited, but injured. It is admitted that
whatever permanently reduces the price of produce diminishes rent: and
it is quite in accordance with common notions to suppose that if, by the
increased productiveness of land, less land were required for
cultivation, its value, like that of gother articlesg for which the
demand had diminished, would fall.

I am quite willing to admit that rents have not really been lowered by
the progress of agricultural improvement; but why? Because improvement
has never in reality been sudden, but always slow; at no time much
outstripping, and often falling far short of, the growth of capital and
population, which tends as much to raise rent, as the other to lower it,
and which is enabled, as we shall presently see, to raise it much
higher, by means of the additional margin afforded by improvements in
agriculture. First, however, we must examine in what manner the sudden
cheapening of agricultural produce would affect profits and wages.

In the beginning, money wages would probably remain the same as before,
and the labourers would have the full benefit of the cheapness. They
would be enabled to increase their consumption either of food or of
other articles, and would receive the same cost, and a greater quantity.
So hfarh, profits would be unaffected. But the permanent remuneration of
the labourers essentially depends on what we have called their habitual
standard; the extent of the requirements which, as a class, they insist
on satisfying before they choose to have children. If their tastes and
requirements receive a durable impress from the sudden improvement in
their condition, the benefit to the class will be permanent. But the
same cause which enables them to purchase greater comforts and
indulgences with the same wages, would enable them to purchase the same
amount of comforts Edition: current; Page: [728] and indulgences with
lower wages; and a greater population may now exist, without reducing
the labourers below the condition to which they are accustomed. Hitherto
this and no other has been the use which the labourers have commonly
made of any increase of their means of living; they have treated it
simply as convertible into food for a greater number of children. It is
probable, therefore, that population would be stimulated, and that after
the lapse of a generation the real wages of labour would be no higher
than before the improvement: the reduction being partly brought about by
a fall of money wages, and partly through the price of food, the cost of
which, from the demand occasioned by the increase of population, would
be iincreased. To the extent to which money wages fell, profits would
rise; the capitalist obtaining a greater quantity of equally efficient
labour by the same outlay of capital. We thus see that a diminution of
the cost of living, whether arising from agricultural improvements or
from the importation of foreign produce, if the habits and requirements
of the labourers are not raised, jusuallyj lowers money wages and rent,
and raises the general rate of profit.

What is true of improvements which cheapen the production of food, is
true also of the substitution of a cheaper for a more costly variety of
it. The same land yields to the same labour a much greater quantity of
human nutriment in the form of maize or potatoes, than in the form of
wheat. If the labourers were to give up bread, and feed only on those
cheaper products, taking as their compensation not a greater quantity of
other consumable commodities, but earlier marriages and larger families,
the cost of labour would be much diminished, and if labour continued
equally efficient, profits would rise; while rent would be much lowered,
since food for the whole population could be raised on half or a third
part of the land now sown with corn. At the same time, it being evident
that land too barren to be cultivated for wheat might be made in case of
necessity to yield potatoes sufficient to support the little labour
necessary for producing them, cultivation might ultimately descend
lower, and rent eventually rise higher, on a potato or maize system,
than on a corn system; because the land would be capable of feeding a
much larger population before reaching the limit of its powers.

If the improvement, which we suppose to take place, is not in the
production of food, but of some manufactured article consumed by the
labouring class, the effect on wages and profits will kat firstk be the
same; but the effect on rent very different. lIt will not be lowered; it
will evenl, if the ultimate effect of the improvement is an increase of
population, be Edition: current; Page: [729] raisedm: in which last case
profits will be loweredm. The reasons are too evident to require
statement.

§ 5. [Fifth case; all the three elements progressive] We have
considered, on the one hand, the manner in which the distribution of the
produce into rent, profits, and wages, is affected by the ordinary
increase of population and capital, and on the other, how it is affected
by improvements in production, and more especially in agriculture. We
have found that the former cause lowers profits, and raises rent and the
cost of labour: while the tendency of agricultural improvements is to
diminish rent; and all improvements which cheapen any article of the
labourer’s consumption, tend to diminish the cost of labour and to raise
profits. The tendency of each cause in its separate state being thus
ascertained, it is easy to determine the tendency of the actual course
of things, in which the two movements are going on simultaneously,
capital and population increasing with tolerable steadiness, while
improvements in agriculture are made from time to time, and the
knowledge and practice of improved methods abecome diffuseda gradually
through the community.

The habits and requirements of the labouring classes being given (which
determine their real wages), brentsb, profits, and money wages at any
given time, are the result of the composition of these rival forces. If
during any period agricultural improvement advances faster than
population, rent and money wages during that period will tend downward,
and profits upward. If population advances more rapidly than
agricultural improvement, either the labourers will submit to a
reduction in the quantity or quality of their food, or if not, rent and
money wages will progressively rise, and profits will fall.

Agricultural skill and knowledge are of slow growth, and still slower
diffusion. Inventions and discoveries, too, occur only occasionally,
while the increase of population and capital are continuous agencies. It
therefore seldom happens that improvement, even during a short time, has
so much the start of population and capital as actually to lower rent,
or raise the rate of profits. There are many countries in which the
growth of population and capital cisc not rapid, but in these
agricultural improvement is less active still. Population dalmostd
everywhere treads close on the heels of agricultural improvement, and
effaces its effects as fast as they are produced.

The reason why agricultural improvement seldom lowers rent, is that it
seldom cheapens food, but only prevents it from growing dearer; and
seldom, if ever, throws land out of cultivation, but only enables worse
and Edition: current; Page: [730] worse land to be taken in efor the
supply of an increasing demande. What is sometimes called the natural
state of a country which is but half cultivated, namely, that the land
is highly productive, and food obtained in great abundance by little
labour, is only true of unoccupied countries colonized by a civilized
people. In the United States the worst land in cultivation is of a high
quality f(except sometimes in the immediate vicinity of gmarkets or
means of conveyanceg, where a bad quality is compensated by a good
situation)f; and even if no further improvements were made in
agriculture or locomotion, cultivation would have many steps yet to
descend, before the increase of population and capital would be brought
to a stand; but in Europe five hundred years ago, though so thinly
peopled in comparison to the present population, it is probable that the
worst land under the plough was, from the rude state of agriculture,
quite as unproductive as the worst land now cultivated; and that
cultivation had approached as near to the ultimate limit of profitable
tillage, in those times as in the present. What the agricultural
improvements since made have really done is, by increasing the capacity
of production of land in general, to enable tillage to extend downwards
to a much worse natural quality of land than the worst which at that
time would have admitted of hcultivation by a capitalist for profith;
thus rendering a much greater increase of capital and population
possible, and removing always a little and a little further off, the
barrier which restrains them; population meanwhile always pressing so
hard against the barrier, that there is never any visible margin left
for it to seize, every inch of ground made vacant for it by improvement
being at once filled up by its advancing columns. Agricultural
improvement may thus be considered to be not so much a counterforce
conflicting with increase of population, as a partial relaxation of the
bonds which confine that increase.

The effects produced on the division of the produce by an increase of
production, under the joint influence of increase of population and
capital and improvements of agriculture, are very different from those
deduced from the hypothetical cases previously discussed. In particular,
the effect on rent is most materially different. We remarked that—while
a great agricultural improvement made suddenly and universally would in
the first instance inevitably lower rent—such improvements enable rent,
in the progress of society, to rise gradually to a much higher limit
than it could otherwise attain, since they enable a much lower quality
of land to be ultimately cultivated. But in the case we are now
supposing, which nearly corresponds to the usual course of things, this
ultimate effect becomes the immediate effect. Suppose cultivation to
have reached, or almost reached, the utmost limit permitted by the state
of the industrial arts, and rent, Edition: current; Page: [731]
therefore, to have attained nearly the highest point to which it can be
carried by the progress of population and capital, with the existing
amount of skill and knowledge. If a great agricultural improvement were
suddenly introduced, it might throw back rent for a considerable space,
leaving it to regain its lost ground by the progress of population and
capital, and afterwards to go on further. But, taking place, as such
improvement always does, very gradually, it causes no retrograde
movement of either rent or cultivation; it merely enables the one to go
on rising, and the other extending, long after they must otherwise have
stopped. It would do this even without the necessity of resorting to a
worse quality of land; simply by enabling the lands already in
cultivation to yield a greater produce, with no increase of the
proportional cost. If by improvements of agriculture all the lands in
cultivation could be made, even with double labour and capital, to yield
a double produce, (supposing that in the meantime population increased
so as to require this double quantity) all rents would be doubled.

To illustrate the point, let us revert to the numerical example in a
former page. Three qualities of land yield respectively 100, 80, and 60
bushels to the same outlay on the same extent of surface. If No. 1 could
be made to yield 200, No. 2, 160, and No. 3, 120 bushels, at only double
the expense, and therefore without any increase of the cost of
production, and if the population, having doubled, required all this
increased quantity, the rent of No. 1 would be 80 bushels instead of 40,
and of No. 2, 40 instead of 20, while the price and value per bushel
would be the same as before: so that corn rent and money rent would both
be doubled. I need not point out the difference between this result, and
what we have shown would take place if there were an improvement in
production without the accompaniment of an increased demand for food.

Agricultural improvement, then, is always ultimately, and in the manner
in which it generally takes place also immediately, beneficial to the
landlord. We may add, that when it takes place in that manner, it is
beneficial to no one else. When the demand for produce fully keeps pace
with the increased capacity of production, food is not cheapened; the
labourers are not, even temporarily, benefited; the cost of labour is
not diminished, nor profits raised. There is a greater aggregate
production, a greater produce divided among the labourers, and a larger
gross profit; but the wages being shared among a larger population, and
the profits spread over a larger capital, no labourer is better off, nor
does any capitalist derive from the same amount of capital a larger
income.

The result of this long investigation may be summed up as follows. The
economical progress of a society constituted of landlords, capitalists,
and labourers, tends to the progressive enrichment of the landlord
class; while the cost of the labourer’s subsistence tends on the whole
to increase, and Edition: current; Page: [732] profits to fall.
Agricultural improvements are a counteracting force to ithe twoi last
effects; but the first, though a case is conceivable in which it would
be temporarily checked, is ultimately in a high degree promoted by those
improvements; and the increase of population tends to transfer all the
benefits derived from agricultural improvement to the landlords alone.
What other consequences, in addition to these, or in modification of
them, arise from the industrial progress of a society thus constituted,
I shall endeavour to show in the succeeding chapter.

Edition: current; Page: [733]


CHAPTER IV: Of the Tendency of Profits to a Minimum

§ 1. [Doctrine of Adam Smith on the competition of capital] The tendency
of profits to fall as society advances, which has been brought to notice
in the preceding chapter, was early recognised by writers on industry
and commerce; but the laws which govern profits not being then
understood, the phenomenon was ascribed to a wrong cause. Adam Smith
considered profits to be determined by what he called the competition of
capital; and concluded that when capital increased, this competition
must likewise increase, and profits must fall. It is not quite certain
what sort of competition Adam Smith had here in view. His words in the
chapter on Profits of Stock* are, “When the stocks of many rich
merchants are turned into the same trade, their mutual competition
naturally tends to lower its profits; and when there is a like increase
of stock in all the different trades carried on in the same society, the
same competition must produce the same effect in them all.” This passage
would lead us to infer that, in Adam Smith’s opinion, the manner in
which the competition of capital lowers profits is by lowering prices;
that being ausuallya the mode in which an increased investment of
capital in any particular trade, blowers the profits of that trade. But
if this was his meaning, he overlooked the circumstance, that the fall
of price, which if confined to one commodity really does lower the
profits of the producer, ceases to have that effect as soon as it
extends to all commodities; because, when all things have fallen,
nothing has really fallen, except nominally; and even computed in money,
the expenses of every producer have diminished as much as his returns.
Unless indeed labour be the one commodity which has not fallen in money
price, when all other things have: if so, what has really taken place is
a rise of wages; and it is that, and not the fall of prices, which has
lowered the profits of capital. There is another thing which escaped the
notice of Adam Smith; that the supposed universal fall of prices,
through increased competition of Edition: current; Page: [734] capitals,
is a thing which cannot take place. Prices are not determined by the
competition of the sellers only, but also by that of the buyers; by
demand as well as supply. The demand which affects money prices consists
of all the money in the hands of the community, destined to be laid out
in commodities; and as long as the proportion of this to the commodities
is not diminished, there is no fall of general prices. Now, howsoever
capital may increase, and give rise to an increased production of
commodities, a full share of the capital will be drawn to the business
of producing or importing money, and the quantity of money will be
augmented in an equal ratio with the quantity of commodities. For if
this were not the case, and if money, therefore, were, as the theory
supposes, perpetually acquiring increased purchasing power, those who
produced or imported it would obtain constantly increasing profits; and
this could not happen without attracting clabour andc capital to that
occupation from dother employments. If a general fall of prices, and
increased value of money, were really to occur, it could only be as eae
consequence of increased cost of production, from the gradual exhaustion
of the mines.

It is not tenable, therefore, in theory, that the increase of capital
produces, or tends to produce, a general decline of money prices.
Neither is it true, that any fgeneral decline of prices, as capital
increased, has manifested itself in fact. The only things observed to
fall in price with the progress of society, are those in which there
have been improvements in production, greater than have taken place in
the production of the precious metals; as for example, all spun and
woven fabrics. Other things, again, instead of falling, have risen in
price, because their cost of production, compared with that of gold and
silver, has increased. Among these are all kinds of food, comparison
being made with a much earlier period of history. The doctrine,
therefore, that competition of capital lowers profits by lowering
prices, is incorrect in fact, as well as unsound in principle.

But it is not certain that Adam Smith really held that doctrine; for his
language on the subject is wavering and unsteady, denoting the absence
of a definite and well-digested opinion. Occasionally he seems to think
that the mode in which the competition of capital lowers profits, is by
raising wages. And when speaking of the rate of profit in new colonies,
he seems on the very verge of grasping the complete theory of the
subject. “As the colony increases, the profits of stock gradually
diminish. When the most fertile and best situated lands have been all
occupied, less profit can be made by the gcultivatorsg of what is
inferior both in soil and situation.”[*] Edition: current; Page: [735]
Had Adam Smith meditated longer on the subject, and systematized his
view of it by harmonizing with each other the various glimpses which he
caught of it from different points, he would have perceived that this
last is the true cause of the fall of profits usually consequent upon
increase of capital.

§ 2. [Doctrine of Mr. Wakefield respecting the field of employment] Mr.
Wakefield, in his aCommentary on Adam Smith, band his important writings
on Colonization,b takes a much clearer view of the subject, and arrives,
through a substantially correct series of deductions, at practical
conclusions which appear to me just and important; but he is not equally
happy in incorporating his valuable speculations with the results of
previous thought, and reconciling them with other truths. Some of the
theories of Dr. Chalmers, in his chapter “On the Increase and cLimitsc
of Capital,”[*] and the two chapters which follow it, coincide in their
tendency and spirit with those of Mr. Wakefield; but Dr. Chalmers’
ideas, though delivered, as is his dcustomd, with a most attractive
semblance of clearness, are really on this subject much more confused
than even those of Adam Smith, and more decidedly infected with the
often refuted notion that the competition of capital lowers general
prices; the subject of Money apparently not ehaving beene included among
the parts of Political Economy which this acute and vigorous writer had
carefully studied.

Mr. Wakefield’s explanation of the fall of profits is briefly this.
Production is limited not solely by the quantity of capital and of
labour, but also by the extent of the “field of employment.” The field
of employment for capital is two-fold; the land of the country, and the
capacity of foreign markets to take its manufactured commodities. On a
limited extent of land, only a limited quantity of capital can find
employment at a profit. As the quantity of capital approaches this
limit, profit falls; when the limit is attained, profit is annihilated;
and can only be restored through an extension of the field of
employment, either by the acquisition of fertile land, or by opening new
markets in foreign countries, from which food and materials can be
purchased with the products of domestic capital. These propositions are,
in my opinion, substantially true; and, even to the phraseology in which
they are expressed, considered as adapted to popular and practical
rather than scientific uses, I have nothing to object. The error which
seems to me imputable to Mr. Wakefield is that of supposing his
doctrines to be Edition: current; Page: [736] in contradiction to the
principles of the best school of preceding political economists, instead
of being, as they really are, corollaries from those principles; though
corollaries which, perhaps, would not always have been admitted by those
political economists themselves.

The most scientific treatment of the subject which I have met with, is
in an essay on the effects of Machinery, fpublished in the Westminster
Review for January 1826,f by Mr. William Ellis;* which was doubtless
unknown to Mr. Wakefield, but which had preceded him, though by a
different path, in several of his leading conclusions. This essay
excited little notice, partly from being published anonymously in a
periodical, and partly because it was much in advance of the state of
political economy at the time. In Mr. Ellis’s view of the subject, the
questions and difficulties raised by Mr. Wakefield’s speculations and by
those of Dr. Chalmers, find a solution consistent with the principles of
political economy laid down in the present treatise.

§ 3. [What determines the minimum rate of profit] There is at every time
and place some particular rate of profit, which is the lowest that will
induce the people of that country and time to accumulate savings, and to
employ those savings productively. This minimum rate of profit varies
according to circumstances. It depends on two elements. One is, the
strength of the effective desire of accumulation; the comparative
estimate made by the people of that place and era, of future interests
when weighed against present. This element chiefly affects the
inclination to save. The other element, which affects not so much the
willingness to save as the disposition to employ savings productively,
is the degree of security of capital engaged in industrial operations. A
state of general insecurity, no doubt affects also the disposition to
save. A hoard may be a source of additional danger to its reputed
possessor. But as it may also be a powerful means of averting dangers,
the effects in this respect may perhaps be looked upon as balanced. But
in employing any funds which a person may possess as capital on his own
account, or in lending it to others to be so employed, there is always
some additional risk, over and above that incurred by keeping it idle in
his own custody. This extra risk is great in proportion as the general
state of society is insecure: it may be equivalent to twenty, thirty, or
fifty per cent, or to no more than one or two; something, however, it
must Edition: current; Page: [737] always be: and for this, the
expectation of profit must be sufficient to compensate.

There would be adequate motives for a certain amount of saving, even if
capital yielded no profit. There would be an inducement to lay by in
good times a provision for bad; to reserve something for sickness and
infirmity, or as a means of leisure and independence in the latter part
of life, or a help to children in the outset of it. Savings, however,
which have only these ends in view, have not much tendency to increase
the amount of capital permanently in existence. These motives only
prompt apersonsa to save at one period of life what bthey purposeb to
consume at another, or what will be consumed by ctheirc children before
they can completely provide for themselves. The savings by which an
addition is made to the national capital, usually emanate from the
desire of persons to improve what is termed their condition in life, or
to make a provision for children or others, independent of their
exertions. Now, to the strength of these inclinations it makes a very
material difference how much of the desired object can be effected by a
given amount and duration of self-denial; which again depends on the
rate of profit. And there is in every country some rate of profit, below
which persons in general will not find sufficient motive to save for the
mere purpose of growing richer, or of leaving others better off than
themselves. Any accumulation, therefore, by which the general capital is
increased, requires as its necessary condition a certain rate of profit;
a rate which an average person will deem to be an equivalent for
abstinence, with the addition of a sufficient insurance against risk.
There are always some persons in whom the effective desire of
accumulation is above the average, and to whom less than this rate of
profit is a sufficient inducement to save; but these merely step into
the place of others whose taste for expense and indulgence is beyond the
average, and who, instead of saving, perhaps even dissipate what they
have received.

I have already observed that this minimum rate of profit, less than
which is not consistent with the further increase of capital, is lower
in some states of society than in others; and I may add, that the kind
of social progress characteristic of our present civilization tends to
diminish it. In the first place, one of the acknowledged effects of that
progress is an increase of general security. Destruction by wars, and
spoliation by private or public violence, are less and less to be
apprehended: and the improvements which may be looked for in education
and in the administration of justice, or, in their default, increased
regard for opinion, afford a growing protection against fraud and
reckless mismanagement. The risks attending the investment of savings in
productive employment require, therefore, a smaller rate of profit to
compensate for them than was required a century ago, and Edition:
current; Page: [738] will hereafter require less than at present. In the
second place, it is also one of the consequences of civilization that
mankind become less the slaves of the moment, and more habituated to
carry their desires and purposes forward into a distant future. This
increase of providence is a natural result of the increased assurance
with which futurity can be looked forward to; and is, besides, favoured
by most of the influences which an industrial life exercises over the
passions and inclinations of human nature. In proportion as life has
fewer vicissitudes, as habits become more fixed, and great prizes are
less and less to be hoped for by any other means than long perseverance,
mankind become more willing to sacrifice present indulgence for future
objects. This increased capacity of forethought and self-control may
assuredly find other things to exercise itself upon than increase of
riches, and some considerations connected with this topic will shortly
be touched upon. The present kind of social progress, however, decidedly
tends, though not perhaps to increase the desire of accumulation, yet to
weaken the obstacles to it, and to diminish the amount of profit which
people absolutely require as an inducement to save and accumulate. For
these two reasons, diminution of risk and increase of providence, a
profit or interest of three or four per cent is as sufficient a motive
to the increase of capital in England at the present day, as thirty or
forty per cent in the Burmese Empire, or in England at the time of King
John. In Holland during the last century a return of two per cent, on
government security, was consistent with an undiminished, if not with an
increasing capital. But though the minimum rate of profit is thus liable
to vary, and though to specify exactly what it is would at any given
time be impossible, such a minimum always exists; and whether it be high
or low, when once it is reached, no further increase of capital can for
the present take place. The country has then attained what is known to
political economists under the name of the stationary state.

§ 4. [In opulent countries, profits are habitually near to the minimum]
We now aarrive at the fundamental proposition which this chapter is
intended to inculcate. When a country has long possessed a large
production, and a large net income to make savings from, and when,
therefore, the means have long existed of making a great annual addition
to capital; (the country not having, like America, a large reserve of
fertile land still unused;) it is one of the characteristics of such a
country, that the rate of profit is habitually within, as it were, a
hand’s breadth of the minimum, and the country therefore on the very
verge of the stationary state. By this I do not mean that this state is
likely, in any of the great countries of Europe, to be soon actually
reached, or that capital does not still yield a Edition: current; Page:
[739] profit considerably greater than what is barely sufficient to
induce the people of those countries to save and accumulate. My meaning
is, that it would require but a short time to reduce profits to the
minimum, if capital continued to increase at its present rate, and no
circumstances having a tendency to raise the rate of profit occurred in
the meantime. The expansion of capital would soon reach its ultimate
boundary, if the boundary itself did not continually open and leave more
space.

In England, the ordinary rate of interest on government securities, in
which the risk is next to nothing, may be estimated at a little more
than three per cent: in all other investments, therefore, the interest
or profit calculated upon (exclusively of what is properly a
remuneration for talent or exertion) must be as much more than this
amount, as is equivalent to the degree of risk to which the capital is
thought to be exposed. Let us suppose that in England even so small a
net profit as one per cent, exclusive of insurance against risk, would
constitute a sufficient inducement to save, but that less than this
would not be a sufficient inducement. I now say, that the mere
continuance of the present annual increase of capital, if no
circumstance occurred to counteract its effect, would suffice in a small
number of years to reduce the rate of net profit to one per cent.

To fulfil the conditions of the hypothesis, we must suppose an entire
cessation of the exportation of capital for foreign investment. No more
capital sent abroad for railways or loans; no more emigrants taking
capital with them, to the colonies, or to other countries; no fresh
advances made, or credits given, by bankers or merchants to their
foreign correspondents. We must also assume that there are no fresh
loans for unproductive expenditure, by the government, or on mortgage,
or otherwise; and none of the waste of capital which now takes place by
the failure of undertakings which people are tempted to engage in by the
hope of a better income than can be obtained in safe paths at the
present bhabituallyb low rate of profit. We must suppose the entire
savings of the community to be annually invested in really productive
employment within the country itself; and no new channels opened by
industrial inventions, or by a more extensive substitution of the best
known processes for inferior ones.

Few persons would hesitate to say, that there would be great difficulty
in finding remunerative employment every year for so much new capital,
and most would conclude that there would be what used to be termed a
general glut; that commodities would be produced, and remain unsold, or
be sold only at a loss. But the full examination which we have already
given to this question,* has shown that this is not the mode in which
the inconvenience would be experienced. The difficulty would not consist
in any want Edition: current; Page: [740] of a market. If the new
capital were duly shared among many varieties of employment, it would
raise up a demand for its own produce, and there would be no cause why
any part of that produce should remain longer on hand than formerly.
What would really be, not merely difficult, but impossible, would be to
employ this capital without submitting to a rapid reduction of the rate
of profit.

As capital increased, population either would also increase, or it would
not. If it did not, wages would rise, and a greater capital would be
distributed in wages among the same number of labourers. There being no
more labour than before, and no improvements to render the labour more
efficient, there would not be any increase of the produce; and as the
capital, however largely increased, would only obtain the same gross
return, the whole savings of each year would be exactly so much
subtracted from the profits of the next and of every following year. It
is hardly necessary to say that in such circumstances profits would very
soon fall to the point at which further increase of capital would cease.
An augmentation of capital, much more rapid than that of population,
must soon reach its extreme limit, unless accompanied by increased
efficiency of labour (through inventions and discoveries, or improved
mental and physical education), or unless some of the idle people, or of
the unproductive labourers, became productive.

If population did increase with the increase of capital, and in
proportion to it, the fall of profits would still be inevitable.
Increased population implies increased demand for agricultural produce.
In the absence of industrial improvements, this demand can only be
supplied at an increased cost of production, either by cultivating worse
land, or by a more elaborate and costly cultivation of the land already
under tillage. The cost of the labourer’s subsistence is therefore
increased; and unless the labourer submits to a deterioration of his
condition, profits must fall. In an old country like England, if, in
addition to supposing all improvement in domestic agriculture suspended,
we suppose that there is no increased production in foreign countries
for the English market, the fall of profits would be very rapid. If both
these avenues to an increased supply of food were closed, and population
continued to increase, as it is said to do, at the rate of a thousand a
day, all waste land which admits of cultivation in the existing state of
knowledge would soon be cultivated, and the cost of production and price
of food would be so increased, that, if the clabourersc received the
increased money wages necessary to compensate for dtheird increased
expenses, profits would very soon reach the minimum. The fall of profits
would be retarded if money wages did not rise, or rose in a less degree;
but the margin which can be gained by a deterioration of the Edition:
current; Page: [741] elabourers’e condition is a very narrow one: in
general ftheyf gcannotg bear much reduction; when htheyh can, ithey
havei also a higher standard of necessary requirements, and will not. On
the whole, therefore, we may assume that in such a country as England,
if the present annual amount of savings were to continue, without any of
the counteracting circumstances which now keep in check the natural
influence of those savings in reducing profit, the rate of profit would
speedily attain the minimum, and all further accumulation of capital
would for the present cease.

§ 5. [Profits are prevented from reaching the minimum by commercial
revulsions] What, then, are these counteracting circumstances, which, in
the existing state of things, maintain a tolerably equal struggle
against the downward tendency of profits, and prevent the great annual
savings which take place in this country, from depressing the rate of
profit much nearer to that lowest point to which it is always tending,
and which, left to itself, it would so promptly attain? The resisting
agencies are of several kinds.

First among them, we may notice one which is so simple and so
conspicuous, that some political economists, especially M. de Sismondi
and Dr. Chalmers, have attended to it almost to the exclusion of all
others. This is, the waste of capital in periods of over-trading and
rash speculation, and in the commercial revulsions by which such times
are always followed. It is true that a great part of what is lost at
such periods is not destroyed, but merely transferred, like a gambler’s
losses, to more successful speculators. But even of these mere
transfers, a large portion is always to foreigners, by the hasty
purchase of unusual quantities of foreign goods at advanced prices. And
much also is absolutely wasted. Mines are opened, railways or bridges
made, and many other works of uncertain profit commenced, and in these
enterprises much capital is sunk which yields either no return, or none
adequate to the outlay. Factories are built and machinery erected beyond
what the market requires, or can keep in employment. Even if they are
kept in employment, the capital is no less sunk; it has been converted
from circulating into fixed capital, and has ceased to have any
influence on wages or profits. Besides this, there is a great
unproductive consumption of capital, during the stagnation which follows
a period of general over-trading. Establishments are shut up, or kept
working without any profit, hands are discharged, and numbers of persons
in all ranks, being deprived of their income, and thrown for support on
their savings, find themselves, after the crisis has passed away, in a
condition of more or less impoverishment. Such are the effects of a
commercial revulsion: and Edition: current; Page: [742] that such
revulsions are almost periodical, is a consequence of the very tendency
of profits which we are considering. By the time a few years have passed
over without a crisis, so much additional capital has been accumulated,
that it is no longer possible to invest it at the accustomed profit: all
public securities rise to a high price, the rate of interest on the best
mercantile security falls very low, and the complaint is general among
persons in business that no money is to be made. Does not this
demonstrate how speedily profit would be at the minimum, and the
stationary condition of capital would be attained, if these
accumulations went on without any counteracting principle? But the
diminished scale of all safe gains, inclines persons to give a ready ear
to any projects which hold out, though at the risk of loss, the hope of
a higher rate of profit; and speculations ensue, which, with the
subsequent revulsions, destroy, or transfer to foreigners, a
considerable amount of capital, produce a temporary rise of interest and
profit, make room for fresh accumulations, and the same round is
recommenced.

This, doubtless, is one considerable cause which arrests profits in
their descent to the minimum, by sweeping away from time to time a part
of the accumulated mass by which they are forced down. But this is not,
as might be inferred from the language of some writers, the principal
cause. If it were, the capital of the country would not increase; but in
England it does increase greatly and rapidly. This is shown by the
increasing productiveness of almost all taxes, by the continual growth
of all the signs of national wealth, and by the rapid increase of
population, while the condition of the labourers ais certainly not
declining, but on the whole improvinga. These things prove that each
commercial revulsion, however disastrous, is very far from destroying
all the capital which has been added to the accumulations of the country
since the last revulsion preceding it, and that, invariably, room is
either found or made for the profitable employment of a perpetually
increasing capital, consistently with not forcing down profits to a
lower rate.

§ 6. [Profits are prevented from reaching the minimum by improvements in
production] This brings us to the second of the counter-agencies,
namely, improvements in production. aThese evidently have the effect of
extending what Mr. Wakefield terms the field of employmenta, that is,
they enable a greater amount of capital to be accumulated and employed
without depressing the rate of profit: provided always that they do not
raise, to a proportional extent, the habits and requirements of the
labourer. If the Edition: current; Page: [743] labouring class gain the
full advantage of the increased cheapness, in other words, if money
wages do not fall, profits are not raised, nor their fall retarded. But
if the blabourersb people up to the improvement in their condition, and
so relapse to their previous state, profits will rise. All inventions
which cheapen any of the things consumed by the clabourersc, unless
dtheird requirements are raised in an equivalent degree, in time lower
money wages: and by doing so, enable a greater capital to be accumulated
and employed, before profits fall back to what they were previously.

Improvements which only affect things consumed exclusively by the richer
classes, do not operate precisely in the same manner. The cheapening of
lace or velvet has no effect in diminishing the cost of labour; and no
mode can be pointed out in which it can raise the rate of profit, so as
to make room for a larger capital before the minimum is attained. It,
however, produces an effect which is virtually equivalent; it lowers, or
tends to lower, the minimum itself. In the first place, eincreasede
cheapness of articles of consumption promotes the inclination to save,
by affording to all consumers a surplus which they may lay by,
consistently with their accustomed manner of living; and unless they
were fpreviouslyf suffering actual hardships, it will require little
self-denial to save some part at least of this surplus. In the next
place, whatever enables people to live equally well on a smaller income,
inclines them to lay by capital for a lower rate of profit. If people
can live on an independence of 500l. a year in the same manner as they
formerly could on one of 1000l., some persons will be induced to save in
hopes of the one, who would have been deterred by the more remote
prospect of the other. All improvements, therefore, in the production of
almost any commodity, tend in some degree to widen the interval which
has to be passed before arriving at the stationary state: but this
effect belongs in a much greater degree to the improvements which affect
the articles consumed by the labourer, since these conduce to it in two
ways; they induce people to accumulate for a lower profit, and they also
raise the rate of profit itself.

§ 7. [Profits are prevented from reaching the minimum by the importation
of cheap necessaries and instruments] Equivalent in effect to
improvements in production, is the acquisition of any new power of
obtaining cheap commodities from foreign countries. If necessaries are
cheapened, whether they are so by improvements at home or importation
from abroad, is exactly the same thing to wages and profits. Unless the
labourer obtains, and by an improvement of his habitual standard, keeps,
the whole benefit, Edition: current; Page: [744] the cost of labour is
lowered, and the rate of profit raised. As long as food can continue to
be imported for an increasing population without any diminution of
cheapness, so long the declension of profits through the increase of
population and capital is arrested, and accumulation may go on without
making the rate of profit draw nearer to the minimum. And on this ground
it is believed by some, that the repeal of the corn laws has opened to
this country a long era of rapid increase of capital with an
undiminished rate of profit.

Before inquiring whether this expectation is reasonable, one remark must
be made, which is much at variance with commonly received notions.
Foreign trade does not necessarily increase the field of employment for
capital. It is not the mere opening of a market for aa country’sa
productions, that tends to raise the rate of profits. If nothing were
obtained in exchange for those productions but the luxuries of the rich,
the expenses of no capitalist would be diminished; profits would not be
at all raised, nor room made for the accumulation of more capital
without submitting to a reduction of profits: and if the attainment of
the stationary state were at all retarded, it would only be because the
diminished cost at which a certain degree of luxury could be enjoyed,
might induce people, in that prospect, to bmake fresh savingsb for a
lower profit than they formerly were willing to do. When foreign trade
makes room for more capital at the same profit, it is by enabling the
necessaries of life, or the habitual articles of the labourer’s
consumption, to be obtained at smaller cost. It may do this in two ways;
cby the importation eitherc of those commodities themselves, or of the
means and appliances for producing them. Cheap iron has, in a certain
measure, the same effect on profits and the cost of labour as cheap
corn, because cheap iron makes cheap tools for agriculture and cheap
machinery for clothing. But a foreign trade which neither directly, nor
by any indirect consequence, increases the cheapness of anything
consumed by the labourers, does not, any more than an invention or
discovery in the like case, tend to raise profits or retard their fall;
it merely substitutes the production of goods for foreign markets, in
the room of the home production of luxuries, leaving the employment for
capital neither greater nor less than before. It is true, that there is
scarcely any export trade which, in a country that already imports
necessaries or materials, comes within these conditions: for every
increase of exports enables the country to obtain all its imports on
cheaper terms than before.

A country whichd, as is now the case with England,d admits food of all
kinds, and all necessaries and the materials of necessaries, to be
freely Edition: current; Page: [745] imported from all parts of the
world, eno longer depends on the fertility of her own soil to keep up
her rate of profits, but on the soil of the whole world. It remains to
consider how far this resource can be counted upon, for making head
during a very long period against the tendency of profits to decline as
capital increases.

It must, of course, be supposed that with the increase of capital,
population also increases; for if it did not, the consequent rise of
wages would bring down profits, in spite of any cheapness of ffoodf.
Suppose then that the population of Great Britain goes on increasing at
its present rate, and demands every year a supply of imported food
considerably beyond that of the year preceding. This annual increase in
the food demanded from the exporting countries, can only be obtained
either by great improvements in their agriculture, or by the application
of a great additional capital to the growth of food. The former is
likely to be a very slow process, from the rudeness and ignorance of the
agricultural classes in the food-exporting countries of Europe, while
the British colonies and the United States are already in possession of
most of the improvements yet made, so far as suitable to their
circumstances. There remains as a resource, the extension of
cultivation. And on this it is to be remarked, that the capital by which
any such extension can take place, is mostly still to be created. In
Poland, gRussia, Hungary, Spain, the increase of capital is extremely
slow. In America it is rapid, but not more rapid than the population.
The principal fund at present available for supplying this country with
a yearly increasing importation of food, is that portion of the annual
savings of America which has hheretoforeh been applied to increasing the
manufacturing establishments of the United States, and which ifree trade
in corn may possibly diverti from that purpose to growing food for our
market. This limited source of supply, unless great improvements take
place in agriculture, cannot be expected to keep pace with the growing
demand of so rapidly increasing a population as that of Great Britain;
and if our population and capital continue to increase with their
present rapidity, the only mode in which food can continue to be
supplied cheaply to the one, is by sending the other abroad to produce
it.

§ 8. [Profits are prevented from reaching the minimum by the emigration
of capital] This brings us to the last of the counter-forces which check
the downward tendency of profits, in a country whose capital increases
faster than that of its neighbours, and whose profits are therefore
nearer to the Edition: current; Page: [746] minimum. This is, the
perpetual overflow of capital into colonies or foreign countries, to
seek higher profits than can be obtained at home. I believe this to have
been for many years one of the principal causes by which the decline of
profits in England has been arrested. It has a twofold operation. In the
first place, it does what a fire, or an inundation, or a commercial
crisis would have done: it carries off a part of the increase of capital
from which the reduction of profits proceeds. Secondly, the capital so
carried off is not lost, but is chiefly employed either in founding
colonies, which become large exporters of cheap agricultural produce, or
in extending and perhaps improving the agriculture of older communities.
It is to the emigration of English capital, that we have chiefly to look
for keeping up a supply of cheap food and cheap materials of clothing,
proportional to the increase of our population; thus enabling an
increasing capital to find employment in the country, without reduction
of profit, in producing manufactured articles with which to pay for this
supply of raw produce. Thus, the exportation of capital is an agent of
great efficacy in extending the field of employment for that which
remains: and it may be said truly that, up to a certain point, the more
capital we send away, the more we shall possess and be able to retain at
home.

In countries which are further advanced in industry and population, and
have therefore a lower rate of profit, than others, there is always,
long before the actual minimum is reached, a practical minimum, viz.
when profits have fallen so much below what they are elsewhere, that,
were they to fall lower, all further accumulations would go abroad. In
the present state of the industry of the world, when athere is
occasiona, in any rich and improving country, to take the minimum of
profits at all into consideration for practical purposes, it is only
this practical minimum that needs be considered. As long as there are
old countries where capital increases very rapidly, and new countries
where profit is still high, profits in the old countries will not sink
to the rate which would put a stop to accumulation; the fall is stopped
at the point which sends capital abroad. It is only, however, by
improvements in production, and even in the production of things
consumed by labourers, that the capital of a country like England is
prevented from speedily reaching that degree of lowness of profit, which
would cause all further savings to be sent to find employment in the
colonies, or in foreign countries.

Edition: current; Page: [747]


CHAPTER V: Consequences of the Tendency of Profits to a Minimum

§ 1. [Abstraction of capital is not necessarily a national loss] The
theory of the effect of accumulation on profits, laid down in the
preceding chapter, materially alters many of the practical conclusions
which might otherwise be supposed to follow from the general principles
of Political Economy, and which were, indeed, long admitted as true by
the highest authorities on the subject.

It must greatly abate, or rather, altogether destroy, in countries where
profits are low, the immense importance which used to be attached by
political economists to the effects which an event or a measure of
government might have in adding to or subtracting from the capital of
the country. We have now seen that the lowness of profits is a proof
that the spirit of accumulation is so active, and that the increase of
capital has proceeded at so rapid a rate, as to outstrip the two
counter-agencies, improvements in production, and increased supply of
cheap necessaries from abroad: and that unless a considerable portion of
the annual increase of capital were either periodically destroyed, or
exported for foreign investment, the country would speedily attain the
point at which further accumulation would cease, or at least
spontaneously slacken, so as no longer to overpass the march of
invention in the arts which produce the necessaries of life. In such a
state of things as this, a sudden addition to the capital of the
country, unaccompanied by any increase of productive power, would be but
of transitory duration; since by depressing profits and interest, it
would either diminish by a corresponding amount the savings which would
be made from income in the year or two following, or it would cause an
equivalent amount to be sent abroad, or to be wasted in rash
speculations. Neither, on the other hand, would a sudden abstraction of
capital, unless of inordinate amount, have any real effect in
impoverishing the country. After a few months or years, there would
exist in the country just as much capital as if none had been taken
away. The abstraction, by raising profits and interest, would give a
fresh stimulus to the accumulative principle, which Edition: current;
Page: [748] would speedily fill up the vacuum. Probably, indeed, the
only effect that would ensue, would be that for some time afterwards
less capital would be exported, and less thrown away in hazardous
speculation.

In the first place, then, this view of things greatly weakens, in a
wealthy and industrious country, the force of the economical argument
against the expenditure of public money for really valuable, even though
aindustriouslya unproductive, purposes. If for any great object of
justice or philanthropic policy, such as the industrial regeneration of
Ireland, or a comprehensive measure of colonization or of public
education, it were proposed to raise a large sum by way of loan,
politicians need not demur to the abstraction of so much capital, as
tending to dry up the permanent sources of the country’s wealth, and
diminish the fund which supplies the subsistence of the labouring
population. The utmost expense which could be requisite for any of these
purposes, would not in all probability deprive one labourer of
employment, or diminish the next year’s production by one ell of cloth
or one bushel of grain. In poor countries, the capital of the country
requires the legislator’s sedulous care; he is bound to be most cautious
of encroaching upon it, and should favour to the utmost its accumulation
at home, and its introduction from abroad. But in rich, populous, and
highly cultivated countries, it is not capital which is the deficient
element, but fertile land; and what the legislator should desire and
promote, is not a greater aggregate saving, but a greater return to
savings, either by improved cultivation, or by access to the produce of
more fertile lands in other parts of the globe. In such countries, the
government may take any moderate portion of the capital of the country
and bexpend it asb revenue, without affecting the national wealth: the
whole being either drawn from that portion of the annual savings which
would otherwise be sent abroad, or being subtracted from the
unproductive expenditure of individuals for the next year or two, since
every million spent makes room for another million to be saved before
reaching the overflowing point. When the object in view is worth the
sacrifice of such an amount of the expenditure that furnishes the daily
enjoyments of the people, the only well-grounded economical objection
against taking the necessary funds directly from capital, consists of
the inconveniences attending the process of raising a revenue by
taxation, to pay the interest of a debt.

The same considerations enable us to throw aside as unworthy of regard,
one of the common arguments against emigration as a means of relief for
the labouring class. Emigration, it is said, can do no good to the
labourers, if, in order to defray the cost, as much must be taken away
from the capital of the country as from its population. That anything
like this proportion could require to be abstracted from capital for the
purpose even of the Edition: current; Page: [749] most extensive
colonization, few, I should think, would now assert: but even on that
untenable supposition, it is an error to suppose that no benefit would
be conferred on the labouring class. If one-tenth of the labouring
people of England were transferred to the colonies, and along with them
one-tenth of the circulating capital of the country, either wages, or
profits, or both, would be greatly benefited, by the diminished pressure
of capital and population upon the fertility of the land. There would be
a reduced demand for food: the inferior arable lands would be thrown out
of cultivation, and would become pasture; the superior would be
cultivated less highly, but with a greater proportional return; food
would be lowered in price, and though money wages would not rise, every
labourer would be considerably improved in circumstances, an improvement
which, if no increased stimulus to population and fall of wages ensued,
would be permanent; while if there did, profits would rise, and
accumulation start forward so as to repair the loss of capital. The
landlords alone would sustain some loss of income; and even they, only
if colonization went to the length of actually diminishing capital and
population, but not if it merely carried off the annual increase.

§ 2. [In opulent countries, the extension of machinery is not
detrimental but beneficial to labourers] From the same principles we are
now able to arrive at a final conclusion respecting the effects which
machinery, and generally the sinking of capital for a productive
purpose, produce upon the immediate and ultimate interests of the
labouring class. The characteristic property of this class of industrial
improvements is the conversion of circulating capital into fixed: and it
was shown in the afirsta Book,* that in a country where capital
accumulates slowly, the introduction of machinery, permanent
improvements of land, and the like, bmightb be, for the time, extremely
injurious; since the capital so employed cmightc be directly taken from
the wages fund, the subsistence of the people and the employment for
labour curtailed, and the gross annual produce of the country actually
diminished. But in a country of great annual savings and low profits, no
such effects need be apprehended. Since even the emigration of capital,
or its unproductive expenditure, or its absolute waste, do not in such a
country, if confined within any moderate bounds, at all diminish the
aggregate amount of the wages fund—still less can the mere conversion of
a like sum into fixed capital, which continues to be productive, have
that effect. It merely draws off at one orifice what was already flowing
out at another; or if not, the greater vacant space left in the
reservoir does but Edition: current; Page: [750] cause a greater
quantity to flow in. Accordingly, in spite of the mischievous
derangements of the money-market which dwere at one timed occasioned by
the esinking of great sums in railways, I was never able toe agree with
those who fapprehendedf mischief, from this source, to the productive
resources of the country. gNotg on the absurd ground (which to any one
acquainted with the elements of the subject needs no confutation) that
railway expenditure is a mere transfer of capital from hand to hand, by
which nothing is lost or destroyed. This is true of what is spent in the
purchase of the land; a portion too of what is paid to parliamentary
agents, counsel, engineers, and surveyors, is saved by those who receive
it, and becomes capital again: but what is laid out in the bonâ fide
construction of the railway itself, is lost and gone; when once
expended, it is incapable of ever being paid in wages or applied to the
maintenance of labourers again; as a matter of account, the result is
that so much food and clothing and tools have been consumed, and the
country has got a railway instead. But what I would urge is, that sums
so applied are mostly a mere appropriation of the annual overflowing
which would otherwise have gone abroad, or been thrown away
unprofitably, leaving neither a railway nor any other tangible result.
The railway gambling of 1844 and 1845 probably saved the country from a
depression of profits and interest, and a rise of all public and private
securities, which would have engendered still wilder speculations, and
when the effects came afterwards to be complicated by the scarcity of
food, would have ended in a still more formidable crisis than hwas
experienced in the years immediately followingh. In the poorer countries
of Europe, the rage for railway construction might have had worse
consequences than in England, were it not that in those countries such
enterprises are in a great measure carried on by foreign capital. The
railway operations of the various nations of the world may be looked
upon as a sort of competition for the overflowing capital of the
countries where profit is low and capital abundant, as England and
Holland. The English railway speculations are a struggle to keep our
annual increase of capital at home; those of foreign countries are an
effort to obtain it.*

It already appears from these considerations, that the conversion of
Edition: current; Page: [751] circulating capital into fixed, whether by
railways, or imanufactoriesi, or ships, or machinery, or canals, or
mines, or works of drainage and irrigation, is not likely, in any rich
country, to diminish the gross produce or the amount of employment for
labour. How much then is the case strengthened, when we consider that
these transformations of capital are of the nature of improvements in
production, which, instead of ultimately diminishing circulating
capital, are the necessary conditions of its increase, since they alone
enable a country to possess a constantly augmenting capital without
reducing profits to the rate which would cause accumulation to stop.
There is hardly any increase of fixed capital which does not enable the
country to contain eventually a larger circulating capital, than it
otherwise could possess and employ within its own limits; for there is
hardly any creation of fixed capital which, when it proves successful,
does not cheapen the articles on which wages are habitually expended.
All capital sunk in the permanent improvement of land, lessens the cost
of food and materials; almost all improvements in machinery cheapen the
labourer’s clothing or lodging, or the tools with which these are made;
improvements in locomotion, such as railways, cheapen to the consumer
all things which are brought from a distance. All these improvements
make the labourers better off with the same money wages, better off if
they do not increase their rate of multiplication. But if they do, and
wages consequently fall, at least profits rise, and, while accumulation
receives an immediate stimulus, room is made for a greater amount of
capital before a sufficient motive arises for sending it abroad. Even
the improvements which do not cheapen the things consumed by the
labourer, and which, therefore, do not raise profits nor retain capital
in the country, nevertheless, as we have seen, by lowering the minimum
of profit for which people will ultimately consent to save, leave an
ampler margin than previously for eventual accumulation, before arriving
at the stationary state.

We may conclude, then, that improvements in production, and emigration
of capital to the more fertile soils and unworked mines of the
uninhabited or thinly peopled parts of the globe, do not, as jappears to
a superficial view, diminish the gross produce and the demand for labour
at home; but, on the contrary, are what we have chiefly to depend on for
increasing both, and are even the necessary conditions of any great or
prolonged augmentation of either. Nor is it any exaggeration to say,
that within certain, and not very narrow, limits, the more capital a
country like England expends in these two ways, the more she will have
left.

Edition: current; Page: [752]


CHAPTER VI: Of the Stationary State

§ 1. [Stationary state of wealth and population is dreaded and
deprecated by writers] The preceding chapters comprise the general
theory of the economical progress of society, in the sense in which
those terms are commonly understood; the progress of capital, of
population, and of the productive arts. But in contemplating any
progressive movement, not in its nature unlimited, the mind is not
satisfied with merely tracing the laws of the movement; it cannot but
ask the further question, to what goal? Towards what ultimate point is
society tending by its industrial progress? When the progress ceases, in
what condition are we to expect that it will leave mankind?

It must always have been seen, more or less distinctly, by political
economists, that the increase of wealth is not boundless: that at the
end of what they term the progressive state lies the stationary state,
that all progress in wealth is but a postponement of this, and that each
step in advance is an approach to it. We have now been led to recognise
that this ultimate goal is at all times near enough to be fully in view;
that we are always on the verge of it, and that if we have not reached
it long ago, it is because the goal itself flies before us. The richest
and most prosperous countries would very soon attain the stationary
state, if no further improvements were made in the productive arts, and
if there were a suspension of the overflow of capital from those
countries into the uncultivated or illcultivated regions of the earth.

This impossibility of ultimately avoiding the stationary state—this
irresistible necessity that the stream of human industry should finally
spread itself out into an apparently stagnant sea—must have been, to the
political economists of the last two generations, an unpleasing and
discouraging prospect; for the tone and tendency of their speculations
goes completely to identify all that is economically desirable with the
progressive state, and with that alone. With Mr. M’Culloch, for example,
prosperity does not mean a large production and a good distribution of
wealth, but a rapid increase of it; his test of prosperity is high
profits; and as the tendency of that very increase of wealth, which he
calls prosperity, is towards low profits, economical progress, according
to him, must tend to the extinction Edition: current; Page: [753] of
prosperity. Adam Smith always assumes that the condition of the mass of
the people, though it may not be positively distressed, must be pinched
and stinted in a stationary condition of wealth, and can only be
satisfactory in a progressive state. The doctrine that, to however
distant a time incessant struggling may put off our doom, the progress
of society must “end in shallows and in miseries,” far from being, as
many people still believe, a wicked invention of Mr. Malthus, was either
expressly or tacitly affirmed by his most distinguished predecessors,
and can only be successfully combated on his principles. Before
attention had been directed to the principle of population as the active
force in determining the remuneration of labour, the increase of mankind
was virtually treated as a constant quantity; it was, at all events,
assumed that in the natural and normal state of human affairs population
must constantly increase, from which it followed that a constant
increase of the means of support was essential to the physical comfort
of the mass of mankind. The publication of Mr. Malthus’ Essay is the era
from which better views of this subject must be dated; and
notwithstanding the acknowledged errors of his first edition, few
writers have done more than himself, in the subsequent editions, to
promote these juster and more hopeful anticipations.

Even in a progressive state of capital, in old countries, a
conscientious or prudential restraint on population is indispensable, to
prevent the increase of numbers from outstripping the increase of
capital, and the condition of the classes who are at the bottom of
society from being deteriorated. Where there is not, in the people, or
in some very large proportion of them, a resolute resistance to this
deterioration—a determination to preserve an established standard of
comfort—the condition of the poorest class sinks, even in a progressive
state, to the lowest point which they will consent to endure. The same
determination would be equally effectual to keep up their condition in
the stationary state, and would be quite as likely to exist. Indeed,
even now, the countries in which the greatest prudence is manifested in
the regulating of population, are often those in which capital increases
least rapidly. Where there is an indefinite prospect of employment for
increased numbers, there is apt to appear less necessity for prudential
restraint. If it were evident that a new hand could not obtain
employment but by displacing, or succeeding to, one already employed,
the combined influences of prudence and public opinion might ain some
measurea be relied on for restricting the coming generation within the
numbers necessary for replacing the present.

§ 2. [But the stationary state is not in itself undesirable] I cannot,
therefore, regard the stationary state of capital and wealth with the
unaffected Edition: current; Page: [754] aversion so generally
manifested towards it by political economists of the old school. I am
inclined to believe that it would be, on the whole, a very considerable
improvement on our present condition. I confess I am not charmed with
the ideal of life held out by those who think that the normal state of
human beings is that of struggling to get on; that the trampling,
crushing, elbowing, and treading on each other’s heels, which form the
existing type of social life, are the most desirable lot of human kind,
or anything but the disagreeable symptoms of one of the phases of
industrial progress. aIt may be a necessary stage in the progress of
civilization, and those European nations which have hitherto been so
fortunate as to be preserved from it, may have it yet to undergo. It is
an incident of growth, not a mark of decline, for it is not necessarily
destructive of the higher aspirations and the heroic virtues; as
America, in her great civil war, bhas provedb to the world, both by her
conduct as a people and by numerous splendid individual examples, and as
England, it is to be hoped, would also prove, on an equally trying and
exciting occasion. But ita is not a kind of social perfection which
philanthropists to come will feel any very eager desire to assist in
realizing. Most fitting, indeed, is it, that while riches are power, and
to grow as rich as possible the universal object of ambition, the path
to its attainment should be open to all, without favour or partiality.
But the best state for human nature is that in which, while no one is
poor, no one desires to be richer, nor has any reason to fear being
thrust back, by the efforts of others to push themselves forward.

That the energies of mankind should be kept in employment by the
struggle for riches, as they were formerly by the struggle of war, until
the better minds succeed in educating the others into better things, is
undoubtedly more desirable than that they should rust and stagnate.
While minds are coarse they require coarse stimuli, and let them have
them. In the meantime, those who do not accept the present very early
stage of human improvement as its ultimate type, may be excused for
being comparatively indifferent to the kind of economical progress which
cexcites Edition: current; Page: [755] the congratulations of dordinaryd
politicians; the mere increase of production and accumulation. For the
safety of national independence it is essential that a country should
not fall much behind its neighbours in these things. But in themselves
they are of little importance, so long as either the increase of
population or anything else prevents the mass of the people from reaping
any part of the benefit of them. I know not why it should be matter of
congratulation that persons who are already richer than any one needs to
be, should have doubled their means of consuming things which give
little or no pleasure except as representative of wealth; or that
numbers of individuals should pass over, every year, from the middle
classes into a richer class, or from the class of the occupied rich to
that of the unoccupied. It is only in the backward countries of the
world that increased production is still an important object: in those
most advanced, what is economically needed is a better distribution, of
which eonee indispensable means is a stricter restraint on population.
Levelling institutions, either of a just or of an unjust kind, cannot
alone accomplish it; they may lower the heights of society, but they
fcannot, of themselves, permanently raisef the depths.

On the other hand, we may suppose this better distribution of property
attained, by the joint effect of the prudence and frugality of
individuals, and of a system of legislation favouring equality of
fortunes, so far as is consistent with the just claim of the individual
to the fruits, whether great or small, of his or her own industry. We
may suppose, for instance (according to the suggestion thrown out in a
former chapter*), a limitation of the sum which any one person may
acquire by gift or inheritance, to the amount sufficient to constitute a
moderate independence. Under this two-fold influence, society would
exhibit these leading features: a well-paid and affluent body of
labourers; no enormous fortunes, except what were earned and accumulated
during a single lifetime; but a much larger body of persons than at
present, not only exempt from the coarser toils, but with sufficient
leisure, both physical and mental, from mechanical details, to cultivate
freely the graces of life, and afford examples of them to the classes
less favourably circumstanced for their growth. This gcondition of
society, so greatly preferable to the present,g is not only perfectly
compatible with the stationary state, but, it would seem, more naturally
allied with that state than with any other.

Edition: current; Page: [756]
There is room in the world, no doubt, and even in old countries, for ha
greath increase of population, supposing the arts of life to go on
improving, and capital to increase. But ieven ifi innocuous, I confess I
see very little reason for desiring it. The density of population
necessary to enable mankind to obtain, in the greatest degree, all the
advantages both of cooperation and of social intercourse, has, in all
the jmostj populous countries, been attained. A population may be too
crowded, though all be amply supplied with food and raiment. It is not
good for man to be kept perforce at all times in the presence of his
species. A world from which solitude is extirpated, is a very poor
ideal. Solitude, in the sense of being often alone, is essential to any
depth of meditation or of character; and solitude in the presence of
natural beauty and grandeur, is the cradle of thoughts and aspirations
which are not only good for the individual, but which society could ill
do without. Nor is there much satisfaction in contemplating the world
with nothing left to the spontaneous activity of nature; with every rood
of land brought into cultivation, which is capable of growing food for
human beings; every flowery waste or natural pasture ploughed up, all
quadrupeds or birds which are not domesticated for man’s use
exterminated as his rivals for food, every hedgerow or superfluous tree
rooted out, and scarcely a place left where a wild shrub or flower could
grow without being eradicated as a weed in the name of improved
agriculture. If the earth must lose that great portion of its
pleasantness which it owes to things that the unlimited increase of
wealth and population would extirpate from it, for the mere purpose of
enabling it to support a larger, but not a better or a happier
population, I sincerely hope, for the sake of posterity, that they will
be content to be stationary, long before necessity compels them to it.

It is scarcely necessary to remark that a stationary condition of
capital and population implies no stationary state of human improvement.
There would be as much scope as ever for all kinds of mental culture,
and moral and social progress; as much room for improving the Art of
Living, and much more likelihood of its being improved, when minds
ceased to be engrossed by the art of getting on. Even the industrial
arts might be as earnestly and as successfully cultivated, with this
sole difference, that instead of serving no purpose but the increase of
wealth, industrial improvements would produce their legitimate effect,
that of abridging labour. Hitherto it is questionable if all the
mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the day’s toil of any
human being. They have enabled a greater population to live the same
life of drudgery and imprisonment, and an Edition: current; Page: [757]
increased number of manufacturers and others to make kfortunes. They
have increased the comforts of the middle classes. But they have not yet
begun to effect those great changes in human destiny, which it is in
their nature and in their futurity to accomplish. Only when, in addition
to just institutions, the increase of mankind shall be under the
deliberate guidance of ljudicious foresight, can the conquests made from
the powers of nature by the intellect and energy of scientific
discoverers, become the common property of the species, and the means of
improving and elevating the universal lot.

Edition: current; Page: [758]


CHAPTER VII: On the Probable Futurity of the Labouring Classes

§ 1. [The theory of dependence and protection is no longer applicable to
the condition of modern society] The observations in the preceding
chapter had for their principal object to deprecate a false ideal of
human society. Their applicability to the practical purposes of present
times, consists in moderating the inordinate importance attached to the
mere increase of production, and fixing attention upon improved
distribution, and a large remuneration of labour, as the atwoa
desiderata. Whether the aggregate produce increases absolutely or not,
is a thing in which, after a certain amount has been obtained, neither
the legislator nor the philanthropist need feel any strong interest:
but, that it should increase relatively to the number of those who share
in it, is of the utmost possible importance; and this, (whether the
wealth of mankind be stationary, or increasing at the most rapid rate
ever known in an old country,) must depend on the opinions and habits of
the most numerous class, the class of manual labourers.

bWhen I speak, either in this place or elsewhere, of “the labouring
classes,” or of labourers as a “class,” I use those phrases in
compliance with custom, and as descriptive of an existing, but by no
means a necessary or permanent, state of social relations. I do not
recognise as either just or salutary, a state of society in which there
is any “class” which is not labouring; any human beings, exempt from
bearing their share of the necessary labours of human life, except those
unable to labour, or who have fairly earned rest by previous toil. So
long, however, as the great social evil exists of a non-labouring class,
labourers also constitute a class, and may be spoken of, though only
provisionally, in that character.b

Edition: current; Page: [759]
Considered in its moral and social aspect, the state of the labouring
people has latterly been a subject of much more speculation and
discussion than formerly; and the opinion that it is not now what it
ought to be, has become very general. The suggestions which have been
promulgated, and the controversies which have been excited, on detached
points rather than on the foundations of the subject, have put in
evidence the existence of two conflicting theories, respecting the
social position desirable for manual labourers. The one may be called
the theory of dependence and protection, the other that of
self-dependence.

According to the former theory, the lot of the poor, in all things which
affect them collectively, should be regulated for them, not by them.
They should not be required or encouraged to think for themselves, or
give to their own reflection or forecast an influential voice in the
determination of their destiny. It is csupposed to bec the duty of the
higher classes to think for them, and to take the responsibility of
their lot, as the commander and officers of an army take that of the
soldiers composing it. This functiond, it is contended,d the higher
classes should prepare themselves to perform conscientiously, and their
whole demeanour should impress the poor with a reliance on it, in order
that, while yielding passive and active obedience to the rules
prescribed for them, they may resign themselves in all other respects to
a trustful insouciance, and repose under the shadow of their protectors.
The relation between rich and poore, according to this theory (a theory
also applied to the relation between men and women)e should be only
fpartlyf authoritative; it should be amiable, moral, and sentimental:
affectionate tutelage on the one side, respectful and grateful deference
on the other. The rich should be in loco parentis to the poor, guiding
and restraining them like children. Of spontaneous action on their part
there should be no need. They should be called on for nothing but to do
their day’s work, and to be moral and religious. Their morality and
religion should be provided for them by their superiors, who should see
them properly taught it, and should do all that is necessary to ensure
their being, in return for labour and attachment, properly fed, clothed,
housed, spiritually edified, and innocently amused.

This is the ideal of the future, in the minds of those whose
dissatisfaction with the gpresentg assumes the form of affection and
regret towards the hpasth. Like other ideals, it exercises an
unconscious influence on the Edition: current; Page: [760] opinions and
sentiments of numbers who never consciously guide themselves by any
ideal. It has also this in common with other ideals, that it has never
been historically realized. It makes its appeal to our imaginative
sympathies in the character of a restoration of the good times of our
forefathers. But no times can be pointed out in which the higher classes
of this or any other country performed a part even distantly resembling
the one assigned to them in this theory. It is an idealization, grounded
on the conduct and character of here and there an individual. All
privileged and powerful classes, as such, have used their power in the
interest of their own selfishness, and have indulged their
self-importance in despising, and not in lovingly caring for, those who
were, in their estimation, degradedi, by being under the necessity of
working for their benefit. I do not affirm thati what has always been
must always be, or that human improvement jhas no tendencyj to correct
the intensely selfish feelings engendered by powerk; but though the evil
may be lessened, it cannot be eradicated, until the power itself is
withdrawnk. This, lat leastl, seems to me undeniable, that long before
the superior classes could be sufficiently improved to govern in the
tutelary manner supposed, the inferior classes would be too much
improved to be so governed.

I am quite sensible of all that is seductive in the picture of society
which this theory presents. Though the facts of it have no prototype in
the past, the feelings have. In them lies all that there is of reality
in the conception. As the idea is essentially repulsive of a society
only held together by mthe relations and feelings arising out of
pecuniary interests, so there is something naturally attractive in a
form of society abounding in strong personal attachments and
disinterested self-devotion. Of such feelings it must be admitted that
the relation of protector and protected has hitherto been the richest
source. The strongest attachments of human beings in general, are
towards the things or the persons that stand between them and some
dreaded evil. Hence, in an age of lawless violence and insecurity, and
general hardness and roughness of manners, in which life is beset with
dangers and sufferings at every step, to those who have neither a
commanding position of their own, nor a claim on the protection of some
one who has—a generous giving of protection, and a grateful receiving of
it, are the strongest ties which connect human beings; the feelings
arising from that relation are their warmest feelings; all the
enthusiasm and tenderness of the most sensitive natures gather round it;
loyalty on the one part and chivalry on the other are principles exalted
into passions. I do Edition: current; Page: [761] not desire to
depreciate these nqualities.n The error olies in not perceiving, that
these virtues and sentiments, like the clanship and the hospitality of
the wandering Arab, belong emphatically to a rude and imperfect state of
the social union; and that the feelings between protector and
protectedp, whether between kings and subjects, rich and poor, or men
and women,p can no longer have this beautiful and endearing character,
where there are no longer any serious dangers from which to protect.
What is there in the present state of society to make it natural that
human beings, of ordinary strength and courage, should glow with the
warmest gratitude and devotion in return for protection? The laws
protect themq, wherever the laws do not criminally fail in their dutyq.
To be under the power of some one, instead of being as formerly the sole
condition of safety, is now, speaking generally, the only situation
which exposes to grievous wrongr. The so-called protectors are now the
only persons against whom, in any ordinary circumstances, protection is
needed. The brutality and tyranny with which every police report is
filled, are those of husbands to wives, of parents to children. That the
law does not prevent these atrocities, that it sis only now making a
first timid attempts to repress and punish them, is no matter of
necessity, but the deep disgrace of those by whom the laws are made and
administered. Nor man or woman who either possesses or is able to earn
tan independentt livelihood, requires any other protection than that
uwhich the law could and ought to giveu. This being the case, it argues
great ignorance of human nature to continue taking for granted that
relations founded on protection must always subsist, and not to see that
the assumption of the part of protector, and of the power which belongs
to it, without any of the necessities which justify it, must engender
feelings opposite to loyalty.

Of the working vmen, at least in the more advanced countries of Europe,v
Edition: current; Page: [762] it may be pronounced certain, that the
patriarchal or paternal system of government is one to which they will
not again be subject. That question wwas decided, when they were taught
to read, and allowed access to newspapers and political tractsx; whenx
dissenting preachers were suffered to go among them, and appeal to their
faculties and feelings in opposition to the creeds professed and
countenanced by their superiorsy; wheny they were brought together in
numbers, to work socially under the same roofz; whenz railways enabled
them to shift from place to place, and change their patrons and
employers as easily as their acoats; when they were encouraged to seek a
share in the government, by means of the electoral franchise.a The
working classes have taken their interests into their own hands, and are
perpetually showing that they think the interests of their employers not
identical with their own, but opposite to them. Some among the higher
classes flatter themselves that these tendencies may be counteracted by
moral and religious education: but they have let the time go by for
giving an education which can serve their purpose. The principles of the
Reformation have reached as low down in society as reading and writing,
and the poor will bnot muchb longer accept morals and religion of other
people’s prescribing. I speak more particularly of cthisc country,
especially the town population, and the districts of the most scientific
agriculture dor thed highest wages, Scotland and the north of England.
Among the more inert and less modernized agricultural population of the
southern counties, it might be possible for the gentry to retain, for
some time longer, something of the ancient deference and submission of
the poor, by bribing them with high wages and constant employment; by
insuring them support, and never requiring them to do anything which
they do not like. But these are two conditions which never have been
combined, and never can be, for long together. A guarantee of
subsistence can only be practically kept up, when work is enforced and
superfluous multiplication restrained by at least a moral compulsion. It
is then, that the would-be revivers of old times which they do not
understand, would feel practically in how hopeless a task they were
engaged. The whole fabric of patriarchal or seignorial influence,
attempted to be raised on the foundation of caressing the poor, would be
shattered against the necessity of enforcing a stringent Poor-law.

Edition: current; Page: [763]
§ 2. [The future well-being of the labouring classes is principally
dependent on their own mental cultivation] It is on a far other basis
that the well-being and well-doing of the labouring people must
henceforth rest. The poor have come out of leading-strings, and cannot
any longer be governed or treated like children. To their own qualities
must now be commended the care of their destiny. Modern nations will
have to learn the lesson, that the well-being of a people must exist by
means of the justice and self-government, the δικαιοσύνη and σωφροσύνη,
of the individual citizens. The theory of dependence attempts to
dispense with the necessity of these qualities in the dependent classes.
But now, when even in position they are becoming less and less
dependent, and their minds less and less acquiescent in the degree of
dependence which remains, the virtues of independence are those which
they stand in need of. aWhatevera advice, exhortation, or guidance is
held out to the labouring classes, must henceforth be tendered to them
as equals, and accepted bby themb with their eyes open. The prospect of
the future depends on the degree in which they can be made rational
beings.

There is no reason to believe that prospect other than hopeful. The
progress indeed chas hitherto been, and still is,c slow. But there is a
spontaneous education going on in the minds of the multitude, which may
be greatly accelerated and improved by artificial aids. The instruction
obtained from newspapers and political tracts dmay not be the most solid
kindd of instruction, but it is ean immense improvement upone none at
all. fWhat it does for a people, has been admirably exemplified during
the cotton crisis, in the case of the Lancashire spinners and weavers,
who have acted with the consistent good sense and forbearance so justly
applauded, simply because, being readers of newspapers, they understood
the causes of the calamity which had befallen them, and knew that it was
in no way imputable either to their employers or to the Government. It
is not certain that their conduct would have been as rational and
exemplary, if the distress had preceded the salutary measure of fiscal
emancipation which gave existence to the penny press.f The institutions
for lectures and discussion, the collective deliberations on questions
of common interest, the trades unions, the political agitation, all
serve to awaken public spirit, to diffuse variety of ideas among the
mass, and to excite gthought and reflection Edition: current; Page:
[764] in hthe more intelligenti. Although the too early attainment of
political franchises by the least educated class might retard, instead
of promoting, their improvement, there can be little doubt that it jhas
beenj greatly stimulated by the attempt to acquire kthemk. In the
meantime, the working classes are now part of the public; in all
discussions on matters of general interest they, or a portion of them,
are now partakers; all who use the press as an instrument may, if it so
lhappensl, have them for an audience; the avenues of instruction through
which the middle classes acquire msuch ideas asm they have, are
accessible to, at least, the operatives in the towns. With these
resources, it cannot be doubted that they will increase in intelligence,
even by their own unaided efforts; while there is nreason to hope that
great improvements both in the quality and quantity of school education
will be oeffected by the exertions peither of government orp of
individuals, and that the progress of the mass of the people in mental
cultivation, and in the virtues which are dependent on it, will take
place more rapidly, and with fewer intermittences and aberrations, than
if left to itself.

From this increase of intelligence, several effects may be confidently
anticipated. First: that they will become even less willing than at
present to be led and governed, and directed into the way they should
go, by the mere authority and prestige of superiors. If they have not
now, still less will they have hereafter, any deferential awe, or
religious principle of obedience, holding them in mental subjection to a
class above them. The theory of dependence and protection will be more
and more intolerable to them, and they will require that their conduct
and condition shall be essentially self-governed. It is, at the same
time, quite possible that they may demand, in many cases, the
intervention of the legislature in their affairs, and the regulation by
law of various things which concern them, often under very mistaken
ideas of their interest. Still, it is their own will, their own ideas
and suggestions, to which they will demand that effect should be given,
and not rules laid down for them by other people. It is Edition:
current; Page: [765] quite consistent with this, that they should feel
qrespect for superiority of intellect and knowledge, and defer much to
the opinions, on any subject, of those whom they think well acquainted
with it. Such deference is deeply grounded in human nature; but they
will judge for themselves of the persons who are and are not entitled to
it.

§ 3. [Probable effects of improved intelligence in causing a better
adjustment of population—Would be promoted by the social independence of
women] It appears to me impossible but that the increase of
intelligence, of education, and of the love of independence among the
working classes, must be attended with a corresponding growth of the
good sense which manifests itself in provident habits of conduct, and
that population, therefore, will bear a gradually diminishing ratio to
capital and employment. This most desirable result would be much
accelerated by another change, which lies in the direct line of the best
tendencies of the time; the opening of industrial occupations freely to
both sexes. The same reasons which make it no longer necessary that the
poor should depend on the rich, make it equally unnecessary that women
should depend on men; and the least which justice requires is that law
and custom should not enforce dependence (when the correlative
protection has become superfluous) by ordaining that a woman, who does
not happen to have a provision by inheritance, shall have scarcely any
means open to her of gaining a livelihood, except as a wife and mother.
Let women who prefer that occupation, adopt it; but that there should be
no option, no other carrière possible for the great majority of women,
except in the humbler departments of life, is aa flagrant social
injustice. The ideas and institutions by which the accident of sex is
made the groundwork of an inequality of legal rights, and a forced
dissimilarity of social functions, must ere long be recognised as the
greatest hindrance to moral, social, and even intellectual improvement.
bOn the present occasion I shall only indicate, among the probable
consequences of the industrial and social independence of womena, a
great diminution Edition: current; Page: [766] of the evil of
over-population. It is by devoting one-half of the human species to that
exclusive function, by making it fill the entire life of one sex, and
interweave itself with almost all the objects of the other, that the
canimalc instinct in question is nursed into the disproportionate
preponderance which it has hitherto exercised in human life.

§ 4. [Tendency of society towards the disuse of the relation of hiring
and service] The political consequences of the increasing power and
importance of the operative classes, and of the growing ascendancy of
numbers, which, even ain England anda under the present institutions, is
rapidly giving to the will of the majority at least a negative voice in
the acts of government, are too wide a subject to be discussed in this
place. But, confining ourselves to economical considerations, and
notwithstanding the effect which improved intelligence in the working
classes, together with just laws, may have in altering the distribution
of the produce to their advantage, I cannot think bthat they will be
permanently contented with the condition of labouring for wages as their
ultimate state. cThey may be willing to pass through the class of
servants in their way to that of employers; but not to remain in it all
their lives. To begin as hired labourers, then after a few years to work
on their own account, and finally employ others, is the normal condition
of labourers in a new country, rapidly increasing in wealth and
population, like America or Australia. But din an old and fully peopled
country, those who begin life as labourers for hire, as a general rule,
continue such to the end, unless they sink into the still lower grade of
recipients of public charity. In the present stage of Edition: current;
Page: [767] human progress, when ideas of equality are daily spreading
more widely among the poorer classes, and can no longer be checked by
anything short of the entire suppression of printed discussion and even
of freedom of speech, it is not to be expected that the division of the
human race into two hereditary classes, employers and employed, can be
permanently maintained. The relation is nearly as unsatisfactory to the
payer of wages as to the receiver. If the rich regard the poor as, by a
kind of natural law, their servants and dependents, the rich in their
turn are regarded as a mere prey and pasture for the poor; the subject
of demands and expectations wholly indefinite, increasing in extent with
every concession made to theme. The total absence of regard for justice
or fairness in the relations between the two, is as marked on the side
of the employed as on that of the employers. We look in vain among the
working classes in general for the just pride which will choose to give
good work for good wages; for the most part, their sole endeavour is to
receive as much, and return as little in the shape of service, as
possiblee. It will sooner or later become insupportable to the employing
classes, to live in close and hourly contact with persons whose
interests and feelings are in hostility to them. Capitalists are almost
as much interested as labourers in placing the operations of industry on
such a footing, that those who labour ffor themf may feel the same
interest in the workg, which is felt by those who labour hon their own
accounth.d

The opinion expressed in a former part of this treatise respecting small
landed properties and peasant proprietors, may have made the reader
anticipate that a wide diffusion of property in land is the resource on
which I rely for exempting at least the agricultural labourers from
exclusive dependence on labour for hire. Such, however, is not my
opinion. I indeed deem that form of agricultural economy to be most
groundlessly icried downi, and to be greatly preferable, in its
aggregate effects on human happiness, to hired labour in any form in
which it exists at present; because the prudential check to population
acts more directly, and is shown by experience to be more efficacious;
and because, in point of security, of independence, of exercise jof any
other than the animal facultiesj, the state of a peasant proprietor is
far ksuperior to that of an agricultural labourer in this or any other
old countryk. Where the former system already exists, Edition: current;
Page: [768] and works on the whole satisfactorily, I should regret, in
the present state of human intelligence, to see it abolished in order to
make way for the other, under a pedantic notion of agricultural
improvement as a thing necessarily the same in every diversity of
circumstances. In a backward state of industrial improvement, as in
Ireland, I should urge its introduction, in preference to an exclusive
system of hired labour; as a more powerful instrument for raising a
population from semi-savage listlessness and recklessness, to
lpersevering industry and prudent calculation.

But a people who have once adopted the large system of production,
either in mmanufacturesm or in agriculture, are not likely to recede
from it; nandn when population is kept in due proportion to the means of
support, oit is not desirable thato they should. Labour is
unquestionably more productive on the system of large industrial
enterprises; the produce, if not greater absolutely, is greater in
proportion to the labour employed: the same number of persons can be
supported equally well with less toil and greater leisure; which will be
wholly an advantage, as soon as civilization and improvement have so far
advanced, that what is a benefit to the whole shall be a benefit to each
individual composing it. pAnd in the moral aspect of the question, which
is still more important than the economical, something better should be
aimed at as the goal of industrial improvement, than to disperse mankind
over the earth in single families, each ruled internally, as families
now are, by a patriarchal despot, and having scarcely any community of
interest, or necessary mental communion, with other human beings. The
domination of the head of the family over the other members, in this
state of things, is qabsoluteq, while rthe effect on his own mind tendsr
towards concentration of all interests in the family, considered as an
expansion of self, and absorption of all passions in that of exclusive
possession, of all cares in those of preservation and acquisition. As a
step out of the merely animal state into the human, out of reckless
abandonment to brute instincts into prudential foresight and
self-government, this moral condition may be seen without displeasure.
But if public spirit, generous sentiments, or strues justice and
equality are desired, association, not isolation, of interests, is the
school in which these excellences are nurtured. The aim of improvement
should be not solely to place human beings in a condition in which they
will be able to do without one another, but to enable them to work with
or for one another in relations not involving dependence. Hitherto there
has been no alternative for those who lived by Edition: current; Page:
[769] their labour, but that of labouring either each for himself alone,
or for a master. But the civilizing and improving influences of
association, andp the efficiency and economy of production on a large
scale, tmay be obtainedt without dividing the producers into two parties
with hostile interests uand feelingsu, the many who do the work being
mere servants under the command of the one who supplies the funds, and
having no interest of their own in the enterprise except to vearn their
wages with as little labour as possible. The speculations and
discussions of the last fifty years, and the events of the last
wthirtyw, are abundantly conclusive on this point. xIf the improvement
which even triumphant military despotism has only retarded, not stopped,
shall continue its coursex, there can be little doubt that the status of
hired labourers will gradually tend to confine itself to the description
of workpeople whose low moral qualities render them unfit for anything
more independent: and that the relation of masters and workpeople will
be gradually superseded by partnership, in one of two forms: yin some
cases, association of the labourers with the capitalist; in zothers, and
perhaps finallyz in all, association of labourers among themselvesv.

§ 5. [Examples of the association of labourers with capitalists] aThe
first of these forms of association has long been practised, not indeed
as a rule, but as an exception. In several departments of industry there
are already cases in which every one who contributes to the work, either
by labour or by pecuniary resources, has a partner’s interest in it,
proportional to the value of his contribution. It is already a common
practice to remunerate those in whom peculiar trust is reposed, by means
of a percentage on the profits: and cases exist in which the principle
is, with bexcellent success, carried down to the class of mere manual
labourers.

In the American ships trading to China, it has long been the custom for
every sailor to have an interest in the profits of the voyage; and to
this has been ascribed the general good conduct of those seamen, and the
extreme rarity of any collision between them and the government or
people of the country. An instance in England, not so well known as it
deserves to be, is that of the Cornish miners. “In Cornwall the mines
are worked strictly on the system of joint adventure; gangs of miners
contracting with the agent, Edition: current; Page: [770] who represents
the owner of the mine, to execute a certain portion of a vein and fit
the ore for market, at the price of so much in the pound of the sum for
which the ore is sold. These contracts are put up at certain regular
periods, generally every two months, and taken by a voluntary
partnership of men accustomed to the mine. This system has its
disadvantages, in consequence of the uncertainty and irregularity of the
earnings, and consequent necessity of living for long periods on credit;
but it has advantages which more than counterbalance these drawbacks. It
produces a degree of intelligence, independence, and moral elevation,
which raise the condition and character of the Cornish miner far above
that of the generality of the labouring class. We are told by Dr.
Barham, that ‘they are not only, as a class, intelligent for labourers,
but men of considerable knowledge.’ Also, that ‘they have a character of
independence, something American, the system by which the contracts are
let giving the takers entire freedom to make arrangements among
themselves; so that each man feels, as a partner in his little firm,
that he meets his employers on nearly equal terms.’ . . . With this
basis of intelligence and independence in their character, we are not
surprised when we hear that ‘a very great number of miners are now
located on possessions of their own, leased for three lives or
ninety-nine years, on which they have built houses;’ or that ‘281,541l.
are deposited in csavingc banks in Cornwall, of which two-thirds are
estimated to belong to miners.’ ”*

Mr. Babbage, who also gives an account of this system, observes that the
payment to the crews of whaling ships is governed by a similar
principle; and that “the profits arising from fishing with nets on the
south coast of England are thus divided: one-half the produce belongs to
the owner of the boat and net; the other half is divided in equal
portions between the persons using it, who are also bound to assist in
repairing the net when required.” Mr. Babbage has the great merit of
having pointed out the practicability, and the advantage, of extending
the principle to manufacturing industry generally.†

Some attention has been excited by an experiment of this nature,
commenced dabove thirtyd years ago by a Paris tradesman, a
house-painter, M. Leclaire,‡ and described by him in a pamphlet
published in the year 1842. M. Leclaire, according to his statement,
employs on an average two Edition: current; Page: [771] hundred workmen,
whom he pays in the usual manner, by fixed wages or salaries. He assigns
to himself, besides interest for his capital, a fixed allowance for his
labour and responsibility as manager. At the end of the year, the
surplus profits are divided among the body, himself included, in the
proportion of their salaries.* The reasons by which M. Leclaire was led
to adopt this system are highly instructive. Finding the conduct of his
workmen unsatisfactory, he first tried the effect of giving higher
wages, and by this he managed to obtain a body of excellent workmen, who
would not quit his service for any other. “Having thus succeeded” (I
quote from an abstract of the pamphlet in Chambers’ Journal,†) “in
producing some sort of stability in the earrangemente of his
establishment, M. Leclaire expected, he says, to enjoy greater peace of
mind. In this, however, he was disappointed. So long as he was able to
superintend everything himself, from the general concerns of his
business down to its minutest details, he did enjoy a certain
satisfaction; but from the moment that, owing to the increase of his
business, he found that he could be nothing more than the centre from
which orders were issued, and to which reports were brought in, his
former anxiety and discomfort returned upon him.”[*] He speaks lightly
of the other sources of anxiety to which a tradesman is subject, but
describes as an incessant cause of vexation the losses arising from the
misconduct of workmen. An employer “will find workmen whose indifference
to his interests is such that they do not perform two-thirds of the
amount of work which they are capable of; hence the continual fretting
of masters, who, seeing their interests neglected, believe themselves
entitled to suppose that workmen are constantly conspiring to ruin those
from whom they derive their livelihood. If the journeyman were sure of
constant employment, his position would in some respects be more
enviable than that of the master, because he is assured of a certain
amount of day’s wages, which he will get whether he works much or
little. He runs no risk, and has no other motive to stimulate him to do
his best than his own sense of duty. The master, on the other hand,
depends greatly on chance for his returns: his position is one of
continual irritation and anxiety. This would no longer be the case to
the same extent, if the interests of the master and those of the
Edition: current; Page: [772] workmen were bound up with each other,
connected by some bond of mutual security, such as that which would be
obtained by the plan of a yearly division of profits.”[*]

Even in the first year during which M. Leclaire’s experiment was in
complete operation, the success was remarkable. Not one of his
journeymen who worked as many as three hundred days, earned in that year
less than 1500 francs, and some considerably more. His highest rate of
daily wages being four francs, or 1200 francs for 300 days, the
remaining 300 francs, or 12l., must have been the smallest amount which
any journeyman, who worked that number of days, obtained as his
proportion of the surplus profit. M. Leclaire describes in strong terms
the improvement which was already manifest in the habits and demeanour
of his workmen, not merely when at work, and in their relations with
their employer, but at other times and in other relations, showing
increased respect both for others and for themselves. fM. Chevalier, in
a work published in 1848,† stated on M. Leclaire’s authority,f that the
increased zeal of the workpeople continued to be a full compensation to
ghimg, even in a pecuniary sense, for the share of profit which he
renounced in their favour. hAnd iMr.i Villiaumé, in 1857‡
observes:—“Quoiqu’il ait toujours banni la fraude, qui n’est que trop
fréquente dans sa profession, il a toujours pu soutenir la concurrence
et acquérir une belle aisance, malgré l’abandon d’une si large part de
ses profits. Assurément il n’y est parvenu que parce que l’activité
inusitée de ses ouvriers, et la surveillance qu’ils exerçaient les uns
sur les autres dans les nombreux chantiers, avaient compensé la
diminution de ses profits personnels.”§

Edition: current; Page: [773]
The beneficent example set by M. Leclaire has been followed, with
brilliant success, by other employers of labour on a large scale at
Paris; and I annex, from the work last referred to (one of the ablest of
the many able treatises on political economy produced by the present
generation of the political economists of France), some signal examples
of the economical and moral benefit arising from this admirable
arrangement.*h

jUntil the passing of the Limited Liability Act, it was held that an
Edition: current; Page: [774] arrangement similar to M. Leclaire’s would
have been impossible in England, as the workmen could not, in the
previous state of the law, have been associated in the profits, without
being liable for losses. One of the many benefits of that great
legislative improvement has been to render partnerships of this
description possible, and we may now expect to see them carried into
practice. Messrs. Briggs, of the Whitwood and Methley collieries, near
Normanton in Yorkshire, have taken the first step. They knowk work these
mines by a company, two-thirds of the capital of which they lthemselves
continue to hold, but mundertakem, in the allotment of the remaining
third, nton give the preference to the “officials and operatives
employed in the concern;” and, what is of still greater importance,
owhenever the annual profit exceeds 10 per cent, one-half the excess
pisp divided Edition: current; Page: [775] among the workpeople and
employés, whether shareholders or not, in proportion to their earnings
during the year. It is highly honourable to these important employers of
labour to have initiated a system so full of benefit both to the
operatives employed and to the general interest of social improvement:
and they express no more than a just confidence in the principle when
they say, that “the adoption of the mode of appropriation thus
recommended would, it is believed, add so great an element of success to
the undertaking as to increase rather than diminish the dividend to the
shareholders.”j

§ 6. [Examples of the association of labourers among themselves] The
form of association, however, which if mankind acontinuea to improve,
must be expected in the end to predominate, is not that which can exist
between a capitalist as chief, and workpeople without a voice in the
management, but the association of the labourers themselves on terms of
equality, collectively owning the capital with which they carry on their
operations, and working under managers elected and removable by
themselves. So long as this idea remained in a state of theory, in the
writings of Owen or of Louis Blanc, it may have appeared, to the common
modes of judgment, incapable of being realized, and not likely to be
tried unless by seizing on the existing capital, and confiscating it for
the benefit of the labourers; which is even now imagined by many
persons, and pretended by more, both in England and on the Continent, to
be the meaning and purpose of Socialism. But there is a capacity of
exertion and self-denial in the masses of mankind, which is never known
but on the rare occasions on which it is appealed to in the name of some
great idea or elevated sentiment. Such an appeal was made by the French
Revolution of 1848. For the first time it then seemed to the intelligent
and generous of the working classes of a great nation, that they had
obtained a government who sincerely desired the freedom and dignity of
the many, and who did not look upon it as their natural and legitimate
state to be instruments of production, worked for the benefit of the
possessors of capital. Under this encouragement, the ideas sown by
Socialist writers, of an emancipation of labour to be effected by means
of association, throve and fructified; and many working people came to
the resolution, not only that they would work for one another, instead
of working for a master tradesman or manufacturer, but that they would
also free themselves, at whatever cost of labour or privation, from the
necessity of paying, out of the produce of their industry, a heavy
tribute for the use of capital; that they would extinguish this tax, not
by robbing the capitalists of what they or their predecessors had
acquired by labour and preserved by economy, but by honestly acquiring
capital for themselves. If only a few operatives had attempted this
arduous Edition: current; Page: [776] task, or if, while many attempted
it, a few only had succeeded, their success might have been deemed to
furnish no argument for their system as a permanent mode of industrial
organization. But, excluding all the instances of failure, there exist,
or existed a bshort timeb ago, upwards of a hundred successful, and many
eminently prosperous, associations of operatives in Paris alone, besides
a considerable number in the departments. An instructive sketch of their
history and principles has been published under the title of
“L’Association Ouvrière Industrielle et Agricole, par H. Feugueray:”[*]
and as it is frequently affirmed in English newspapers that the
associations at Paris have failed, by writers who appear to mistake the
predictions of their enemies at their first formation for the
testimonies of subsequent experience, I think it important to show by
quotations from M. Feugueray’s volume, cstrengthened by still later
testimonies,c that these representations are not only wide of the truth,
but the extreme contrary of it.

The capital of most of the associations was originally confined to the
few tools belonging to the founders, and the small sums which could be
collected from their savings, or which were lent to them by other
workpeople as poor as themselves. In some cases, however, loans of
capital were made to them by the republican government: but the
associations which obtained these advances, or at least which obtained
them before they had already achieved success, are, it appears, in
general by no means the most prosperous. The most striking instances of
prosperity are in the case of those who have had nothing to rely on but
their own slender means and the small loans of fellow-workmen, and who
lived on bread and water while they devoted the whole surplus of their
gains to the formation of a capital. “Souvent,” says M. Feugueray,* “la
caisse était tout-à-fait vide, et il n’y avait pas de salaire du tout.
Et puis la vente ne marchait pas, les rentrées se faisaient attendre,
les valeurs ne s’escomptaient pas, le magasin des matières premières
était vide; et il fallait se priver, se restreindre dans toutes ses
dépenses, se réduire quelquefois au pain et à l’eau . . . C’est au prix
de ces angoisses et de ces misères, c’est par cette voie douloureuse,
que des hommes, sans presque aucune autre ressource au début que leur
bonne volonté et leurs bras, sont parvenus à se former une clientèle, à
acquérir un crédit, à se créer enfin un capital social, et à fonder
ainsi des associations dont l’avenir aujourd’hui semble assuré.”

I will quote at length the remarkable history of one of these
associations.†

“La nécessité d’un puissant capital pour l’établissement d’une fabrique
de pianos était si bien reconnue dans la corporation, qu’en 1848 les
délégués de plusieurs centaines d’ouvriers, qui s’étaient réunis pour la
Edition: current; Page: [777] formation d’une grande association,
demandèrent en son nom au gouvernement une subvention de 300,000 fr.,
c’est-à-dire la dixième partie du fonds total voté par l’Assemblée
Constituante. Je me souviens d’avoir fait, en qualité de membre de la
commission chargée de distribuer ces fonds, des efforts inutiles pour
convaincre les deux délégués avec qui la commission était en rapport,
que leur demande était exorbitante. Toutes mes instances restèrent sans
succès; je prolongeai vainement la conférence pendant près de deux
heures. Les deux délégués me répondirent imperturbablement que leur
industrie était dans une condition spéciale; que l’association ne
pouvait s’y établir avec chance de réussite que sur une très grande
échelle et avec un capital considérable, et que la somme de 300,000 fr.
était un minimum au-dessous duquel ils ne pouvaient descendre; bref,
qu’ils ne pouvaient pas réduire leur demande d’un sou. La commission
refusa.

“Or, après ce refus, et le projet de la grande association étant
abandonné, voici ce qui arriva: c’est que quatorze ouvriers, et il est
assez singulier que parmi eux se soit trouvé l’un des deux délégués, se
résolurent à fonder entre eux une association pour la fabrique des
pianos. Le projet était au moins téméraire de la part d’hommes qui
n’avaient ni argent ni crédit; mais la foi ne raissone pas, elle agit.

“Nos quatorze hommes se mirent donc à l’œuvre, et voici le récit de
leurs premiers travaux, que j’emprunte à un article du National, très
bien redigé par M. Cochut, et dont je me plais à attester l’exactitude.

“Quelques-uns d’entre eux, qui avaient travaillé à leur propre compte,
apportèrent, tant en outils qu’en matériaux, une valeur d’environ 2000
fr. Il fallait, en outre, un fonds de roulement. Chacun des sociétaires
opéra, non sans peine, un versement de 10 fr. Un certain nombre
d’ouvriers, non intéressés dans la société, firent acte d’adhésion, en
apportant de faibles offrandes. Bref, le 10 mars 1849, une somme de 229
fr. 50 cent. ayant été réalisée, l’association fut déclarée constituée.

“Ce fonds social n’était pas même suffisant pour l’installation, et pour
les menues dépenses qu’entraîne au jour le jour le service d’un atelier.
Rien ne restant pour les salaires, il se passa près de deux mois sans
que les travailleurs touchassent un centime. Comment vécurent-ils
pendant cette crise? Comme vivent les ouvriers pendant le chômage, en
partageant la ration du camarade qui travaille, en vendant ou en
engageant pièce à pièce le peu d’effets qu’on possède.

“On avait exécuté quelques travaux. On en toucha le prix le 4 mai 1849.
Ce jour fut pour l’association ce qu’est une victoire à l’entrée d’une
campagne: aussi voulut-on le célébrer. Toutes les dettes exigibles étant
payées, le dividende de chaque sociétaire s’élevait à 6 fr. 61 cent. On
convint d’attribuer à chacun 5 fr. à valoir sur son salaire, et de
consacrer le surplus à un repas fraternel. Les quatorze sociétaires,
dont la plupart n’avaient pas bu de vin depuis un an, se réunirent, avec
leurs femmes et leurs enfants. On Edition: current; Page: [778] dépensa
32 sous par ménage. On parle encore de cette journée, dans les ateliers,
avec une émotion qu’il est difficile de ne pas partager.

“Pendant un mois encore, il fallut se contenter d’une paie de 5 fr. par
semaine. Dans le courant de juin, un boulanger, mélomane ou spéculateur,
offrit d’acheter un piano payable en pain. On fit marché au prix de 480
fr. Ce fut une bonne fortune pour l’association. On eut du moins
l’indispensable. On ne voulut pas évaluer le pain dans le compte des
salaires. Chacun mangea selon son appétit, ou pour mieux dire, selon
l’appétit de sa famille; car les sociétaires mariés furent autorisés à
emporter du pain pour leurs femmes et leurs enfants.

“Cependant l’association, composée d’ouvriers excellents, surmontait peu
à peu les obstacles et les privations qui avaient entravé ses débuts.
Ses livres de caisse offrent les meilleurs témoignages des progrès que
ses instruments ont faits dans l’estime des acheteurs. A partir du mois
d’août 1849, on voit le contingent hebdomadaire s’élever à 10, à 15, à
20 fr. par semaine; mais cette dernière somme ne représente pas tous les
bénéfices, et chaque associé a laissé à la masse beaucoup plus qu’il n’a
touché.

“Ce n’est pas, en effet, par la somme que touche chaque semaine le
sociétaire, qu’il faut apprécier sa situation, mais par la part de
propriété acquise dans un établissement déjà considérable. Voici l’état
de situation de l’association, tel que je l’ai relevé sur l’inventaire
du 30 décembre 1850.

“A cette époque, les associés sont au nombre de trente-deux. De vastes
ateliers ou magasins, loués 2000 fr., ne leur suffisent plus.

Francs
Centimes
*[52] “Ces deux derniers articles ne comprennent que de très bonnes
valeurs, qui, presque toutes, ont été soldées depuis.”
†[52] “Ces adhérents sont des ouvriers du métier qui ont commandité
l’association dans ses débuts: une partie d’entre eux a été remboursée
depuis le commencement de 1851. Le compte des créanciers a aussi
beaucoup diminué; au 23 Avril, il ne s’élevait qu’à 1113 fr. 59 c.”
Indépendamment de l’outillage, évalué à
5,922
60
Ils possèdent en marchandises, et surtout en matières premières, une
valeur de
22,972
28
Ils ont en caisse
1,021
10
Leurs effets en portefeuille montent à
3,540
Le compte des débiteurs s’élève à*
5,861
90
L’actif social est donc en totalité de
39,317
88
Sur ce total, il n’est dû que 4,737 fr. 86 c. à des créanciers, et 1,650
fr. à quatrevingts adhérents;† ensemble
6,387
86
Restent
32,930
2

formant l’actif réel, comprenant le capital indivisible et le capital de
réserve des sociétaires. L’association, à la même époque, avait
soixante-seize pianos en construction, et ne pouvait fournir à toutes
les demandes.”

Edition: current; Page: [779]
dFrom a later report we learn that this society subsequently divided
itself into two separate associations, one of which, in 1854, already
possessed a circulating capital of 56,000 francs,de or 2240l. In 1863
its total capital was 6520l.e*

Edition: current; Page: [780]
The same admirable qualities by which the associations were carried
through their early struggles, maintained them in their increasing
prosperity. Their rules of discipline, instead of being more lax, are
stricter than those of ordinary workshops; but being rules self-imposed,
for the manifest good of the community, and not for the convenience of
an employer regarded as having an opposite interest, they are far more
scrupulously Edition: current; Page: [781] obeyed, and the voluntary
obedience carries with it a sense of personal worth and dignity. With
wonderful rapidity the associated work-people have learnt to correct
those of the ideas they set out with, which are in opposition to the
teaching of reason and experience. Almost all the Edition: current;
Page: [782] associations, at first, excluded piece-work, and gave equal
wages whether the work done was more or less. Almost all have abandoned
this system, and after allowing to every one a fixed minimum, sufficient
for subsistence, they apportion all further remuneration according to
the work done: most Edition: current; Page: [783] of them even dividing
the profits at the end of the year, in the same proportion as the
earnings.*

It is the declared principle fof mostf of these associations, that they
do not exist for the mere private benefit of the individual members, but
for the promotion of the co-operative cause. With every extension,
therefore, of their business, they take in additional members, not
g(when they remain faithful to their original plan)g to receive wages
from them as hired labourers, but to enter at once into the full
benefits of the association, without being required to bring anything
in, except their labour: the only condition imposed is that of receiving
during a few years a smaller share in the annual division of profits, as
some equivalent for the sacrifices of the founders. When members quit
the association, which they are always at liberty to do, they carry none
of the capital with them: it remains an indivisible property, of which
the members for the time being have the use, but not the arbitrary
disposal: by the stipulations of most of the contracts, even if the
association breaks up, the capital cannot be divided, but must Edition:
current; Page: [784] be devoted entire to some work of beneficence or of
public utility. A fixed, and generally a considerable, proportion of the
annual profits is not shared among the members, but added to the capital
of the association, or devoted to the repayment of advances previously
made to it: another portion is set aside to provide for the sick and
disabled, and another to form a fund for extending the practice of
association, or aiding other associations in their need. The managers
are paid, like other members, for the time which is occupied in
management, usually at the rate of the highest paid labour: but the rule
is adhered to, that the exercise of power shall never be an occasion of
profit.

hOf the ability of the associations to compete successfully with
individual capitalists, even at an early period of their existence, M.
Feugueray* said, “Les associations quih ont été fondées depuis deux
années, avaient bien des obstacles à vaincre; la plupart manquaient
presque absolument de capital; toutes marchaient dans une voie encore
inexplorée; elles bravaient les périls qui menacent toujours les
novateurs et les débutants. Et néanmoins, dans beaucoup d’industries où
elles se sont établies, elles constituent déjà pour les anciennes
maisons une rivalité redoutable, qui suscite même des plaintes
nombreuses dans une partie de la bourgeoisie, non pas seulement chez les
traiteurs, les limonadiers et les coiffeurs, c’est-à-dire dans les
industries où la nature des produits permet aux associations de compter
sur la clientèle démocratique, mais dans d’autres industries où elles
n’ont pas les mêmes avantages. On n’a qu’à consulter par exemple les
fabricants de fauteuils, de chaises, de limes, et l’on saura d’eux si
les établissements les plus importants en leurs genres de fabrication ne
sont pas les établissements des associés.”i

Edition: current; Page: [785]
The vitality of these associations must indeed be great, to have enabled
about twenty of them to survive not only the anti-socialist reaction,
which for the time discredited all attempts to enable workpeople to be
their own employers—not only the tracasseries of the police, and the
hostile policy of the government since the usurpation—but in addition to
these obstacles, all the difficulties arising from the trying condition
of financial and commercial affairs from 1854 to 1858. Of the prosperity
attained by some of them even while passing through this difficult
period, I have given examples which must be conclusive to all minds as
to the brilliant future reserved for the principle of co-operation.*

It is not in France alone that these associations have commenced a
Edition: current; Page: [786] career of prosperity. To say nothing at
present of jGermany, Piedmont, and Switzerland (where the Konsum-Verein
of Zürich is one of the most prosperous co-operative associations in
Europe)j, England can produce cases of success rivalling even those
which I have cited from France. Under the impulse commenced by Mr. Owen,
and more recently propagated by the writings and personal efforts of a
band of friends, chiefly clergymen and barristers, to whose noble
exertions too much praise can scarcely be given, the good seed was
widely sown; the necessary alterations in the English law of partnership
were obtained from Parliament, on the benevolent and public-spirited
initiative of Mr. Slaney; many industrial associations, and a still
greater number of co-operative stores for retail purchases, were
founded. Among these are already many instances of remarkable
prosperity, the most signal of which are the Leeds Flour Mill, and the
Rochdale Society of Equitable Pioneers. Of this last association, the
most successful of all, the history has been written in a very
interesting manner by Mr. Holyoake;* and the notoriety which by this and
other means has been given to facts so encouraging, is causing a rapid
extension of associations with similar objects in Lancashirek,
Yorkshire, London, and elsewherek.

The original capital of the Rochdale Society consisted of 28l., brought
together by the unassisted economy of about forty labourers, through the
slow process of a subscription of twopence (afterwards raised to
threepence) per week. With this sum they established in 1844 a small
shop, or store, for the supply of a few common articles for the
consumption of their own families. As their carefulness and honesty
brought them an increase of customers and of subscribers, they extended
their operations to a greater number of articles of consumption, and in
a few years were able to make a large investment in shares of a
Co-operative Corn Mill. Mr. Holyoake thus relates the stages of their
progress up to 1857.

“The Equitable Pioneers’ Society is divided into seven departments:
Grocery, Drapery, Butchering, Shoemaking, Clogging, Tailoring,
Wholesale.

“A separate account is kept of each business, and a general account is
given each quarter, showing the position of the whole.

“The grocery business was commenced, as we have related, in December
Edition: current; Page: [787] 1844, with only four articles to sell. It
now includes whatever a grocer’s shop should include.

“The drapery business was started in 1847, with an humble array of
attractions. In 1854 it was erected into a separate department.

“A year earlier, 1846, the Store began to sell butcher’s meat, buying
eighty or one hundred pounds of a tradesman in the town. After a while
the sales were discontinued until 1850, when the Society had a warehouse
of its own. Mr. John Moorhouse, who has now two assistants, buys and
kills for the Society three oxen, eight sheep, sundry porkers and
calves, which are on the average converted into 130l. of cash per week.

“Shoemaking commenced in 1852. Three men and an apprentice make, and a
stock is kept on sale.

“Clogging and tailoring commenced also in this year.

“The wholesale department commenced in 1852, and marks an important
development of the Pioneers’ proceedings. This department has been
created for supplying any members requiring large quantities, and with a
view to supply the co-operative stores of Lancashire and Yorkshire,
whose small capitals do not enable them to buy in the best markets, nor
command the services of what is otherwise indispensable to every store—a
good buyer, who knows the markets and his business, who knows what, how,
and where to buy. The wholesale department guarantees purity, quality,
fair prices, standard weight and measure, but all on the never-failing
principle, cash payment.”[*]

In consequence of the number of members who now reside at a distance,
and the difficulty of serving the great increase of customers, “Branch
Stores have been opened. In 1856, the first Branch was opened, in the
Oldham Road, about a mile from the centre of Rochdale. In 1857 the
Castleton Branch, and another in the Whitworth Road, were established,
and a fourth Branch in Pinfold.”[†]

The warehouse, of which their original Store was a single apartment, was
taken on lease by the Society, very much out of repair, in 1849. “Every
part has undergone neat refitting and modest decoration, and now wears
the air of a thoroughly respectable place of business. One room is now
handsomely fitted up as a newsroom. Another is neatly fitted up as a
library. . . . . Their newsroom is as well supplied as that of a London
club.”[‡] It is now “free to members, and supported from the Education
Fund,”[§] a fund consisting of 2½ per cent of all the profits divided,
which is set apart for educational purposes. “The Library contains 2200
volumes Edition: current; Page: [788] of the best, and among them, many
of the most expensive books published. The Library is free. From 1850 to
1855, a school for young persons was conducted at a charge of twopence
per month. Since 1855, a room has been granted by the Board for the use
of from twenty to thirty persons, from the ages or fourteen to forty,
for mutual instruction on Sundays and Tuesdays. . . .

“The corn-mill was of course rented, and stood at Small Bridge, some
distance from the town—one mile and a half. The Society have since built
in the town an entirely new mill for themselves. The engine and the
machinery are of the most substantial and improved kind. The capital
invested in the corn-mill is 8450l., of which 3731l. 15s. 2d. is
subscribed by the Equitable Pioneers’ Society. The corn-mill employs
eleven men.”[*]

At a later period they extended their operations to the staple
manufacture itself. From the success of the Pioneers’ Society grew not
only the co-operative corn-mill, but a co-operative association for
cotton and woollen manufacturing. “The capital in this department is
4000l., of which sum 2042l. has been subscribed by the Equitable
Pioneers’ Society. This Manufacturing Society has ninety-six power-looms
at work, and employs twenty-six men, seven women, four boys, and five
girls—in all forty-two persons. . . . .”

“In 1853 the Store purchased for 745l., a warehouse (freehold) on the
opposite side of the street, where they keep and retail their stores of
flour, butcher’s meat, potatoes, and kindred articles. Their
committeerooms and offices are fitted up in the same building. They rent
other houses adjoining for calico and hosiery and shoe stores. In their
wilderness of rooms, the visitor stumbles upon shoemakers and tailors at
work under healthy conditions, and in perfect peace of mind as to the
result on Saturday night. Their warehouses are everywhere as bountifully
stocked as Noah’s Ark, and cheerful customers literally crowd Toad Lane
at night, swarming like bees to every counter. The industrial districts
of England have not such another sight as the Rochdale Co-operative
Store on Saturday night.”* Since the disgraceful failure of the Rochdale
Savings Edition: current; Page: [789] Bank in 1849, the Society’s Store
has become the virtual Savings Bank of the place.

The following Table, completed to 1860 from the Almanack published by
the Society,[*] shows the pecuniary result of its operations from the
commencement.

Year
No. of members
Amount of capital
Amount of cash sales in store (annual)
Amount of profit (annual)
*[65] The latest report to which I have access is that for the quarter
ending September 20, 1864, of which I take the following abstract from
the November number of that valuable periodical the “Co-operator,”
conducted by Mr. Henry Pitman, one of the most active and judicious
apostles of the Co-operative Cause:—“The number of members is 4580,
being an increase of 132 for the three months. The capital or assets of
the society is 59,536_l._ 10_s._ 1_d.,_ or more than last quarter by
3687_l._ 13_s._ 7_d._ The cash received for sale of goods is 45,806_l._
0_s._ 10½_d.,_ being an increase of 2283_l._ 12_s._ 5½_d._ as compared
with the previous three months. The profit realized is 5713_l._ 2_s._
7½_d.,_ which, after depreciating fixed stock account 182_l._ 2_s._
4½_d.,_ paying interest on share capital 598_l._ 17_s._ 6_d.,_ applying
2½ per cent to an educational fund, viz. 122_l._ 17_s._ 9_d.,_ leaves a
dividend to members on their purchases of 2_s._ 4_d._ in the pound.
Nonmembers have received 261_l._ 18_s._ 4_d.,_ at 1_s._ 8_d._ in the
pound on their purchases, leaving 8_d._ in the pound profit to the
society, which increases the reserve fund 104_l._ 15_s._ 4_d._ This fund
now stands at 1352_l._ 7_s._ 11½_d.,_ the accumulation of profits from
the trade of the public with the store since September 1862, over and
above the 1_s._ 8_d._ in the pound allowed to such purchasers.”
£
_s._
_d._
£
_s._
_d._
£
_s._
_d._
1844
28
28
0
0
1845
74
181
12
5
710
6
5
32
17
6
1846
86
252
7
1½
1,146
17
7
80
16
3½
1847
110
286
5
3½
1,924
13
10
72
2
10
1848
140
397
0
0
2,276
6
5½
117
16
10½
1849
390
1,193
19
1
6,611
18
0
561
3
9
1850
600
2,299
10
5
13,179
17
0
889
12
5
1851
630
2,785
0
1½
17,638
4
0
990
19
8½
1852
680
3,471
0
6
16,352
5
0
1,206
15
2½
1853
720
5,848
3
11
22,760
0
0
1,674
18
11½
1854
900
7,172
15
7
33,364
0
0
1,763
11
2½
1855
1400
11,032
12
10½
44,902
12
0
3,106
8
4½
1856
1600
12,920
13
1½
63,197
10
0
3,921
13
1½
1857
1850
15,142
1
2
79,788
0
0
5,470
6
8½
1858
1950
18,160
5
4
71,689
0
0
6,284
17
4½
1859
2703
27,060
14
2
104,012
0
0
10,739
18
6½
1860*
3450
37,710
9
0
152,063
0
0
15,906
9
11

Edition: current; Page: [790]
I need not enter into similar particulars respecting the Corn-Mill
Society, and will merely state that in 1860 its capital is set down, on
the same authority, at 26,618l. 14s. 6d., and the profit for that single
year at 10,164l. 12s. 5d. For the manufacturing establishment I have no
certified information later than that of Mr. Holyoake, who states the
capital of the concern, in 1857, to be 5500l. But a letter in the
Rochdale Observer of May 26, 1860,[*] editorially announced as by a
person of good information, says that the capital had at that time
reached 50,000l.: and the same letter gives highly satisfactory
statements respecting other similar associations; the Rossendale
Industrial Company, capital 40,000l.; the Walsden Co-operative Company,
capital 8000l.; the Bacup and Wardle Commercial Company, with a capital
of 40,000l., “of which more than one-third is borrowed at 5 per cent,
and this circumstance, during the last two years of unexampled
commercial prosperity, has caused the rate of dividend to shareholders
to rise to an almost fabulous height.”

lIt is not necessary to enter into any details respecting the subsequent
history of English Co-operation; the less so, as it is now one of the
recognised elements in the progressive movement of the age, and, as
such, has latterly been the subject of elaborate articles in most of our
leading periodicals, mone of the most recent andm best of which was in
the Edinburgh Review for October 1864: and the progress of Co-operation
from Edition: current; Page: [791] month to month is regularly
chronicled in the “Co-operator.” I must not, however, omit to mention
the last great step in advance in reference to the Co-operative Stores,
the formation in the North of England (and another is in course of
formation in London) of a Wholesale Society, to dispense with the
services of the wholesale merchant as well as of the retail dealer, and
extend to the Societies the advantage which each society gives to its
own members, by an agency for co-operative purchases, of foreign as well
as domestic commodities, direct from the producers.l

It is hardly possible to take any but a hopeful view of the prospects of
mankind, when, in ntwo leading countries of the world, the obscure
depths of society contain simple working men whose integrity, good
sense, self-command, and honourable confidence in one another, have
enabled them to carry these noble experiments to the triumphant issue
which the facts recorded in the preceding pages attest.o

From the progressive advance of the co-operative movement, a great
increase may be looked for even in the aggregate productiveness of
industry. The sources of the increase are twofold. In the first place,
the class of mere distributors, who are not producers but auxiliaries of
production, and whose inordinate numbers, far more than the gains of
capitalists, are the cause why so great a portion of the wealth produced
does not reach the producers—will be reduced to more modest dimensions.
Distributors differ from producers in this, that when producers
increase, even though in any given department of industry they may be
too numerous, they actually produce more: but the multiplication of
distributors does not make more distribution to be done, more wealth to
be distributed; it does but divide the same work among a greater number
of persons, seldom even cheapening the process. By limiting the
distributors to the number really required for making the commodities
accessible to the consumers—which is the direct effect of the
co-operative system—a vast number of hands will be set free for
production, and the capital which feeds and the gains which remunerate
them will be applied to feed and remunerate producers. This great
economy of the world’s resources would be realized even if co-operation
stopped at associations for purchase and consumption, without extending
to production.

The other mode in which co-operation tends, still more efficaciously, to
Edition: current; Page: [792] increase the productiveness of labour,
consists in the vast stimulus given to productive energies, by placing
the labourers, as a mass, in a relation to their work which would make
it their principle and their interest—at present it is neither—to do the
utmost, instead of the least possible, in exchange for their
remuneration. It is scarcely possible to rate too highly this material
benefit, which yet is as nothing compared with the moral revolution in
society that would accompany it: the healing of the standing feud
between capital and labour; the transformation of human life, from a
conflict of classes struggling for opposite interests, to a friendly
rivalry in the pursuit of a good common to all; the elevation of the
dignity of labour; a new sense of security and independence in the
labouring class; and the conversion of each human being’s daily
occupation into a school of the social sympathies and the practical
intelligence.

Such is the noble idea which the promoters of Co-operation should have
before them. But to attain, in any degree, these objects, it is
indispensable that all, and not some only, of those who do the work
should be identified in interest with the prosperity of the undertaking.
Associations which, when they have been successful, renounce the
essential principle of the system, and become joint-stock companies of a
limited number of shareholders, who differ from those of other companies
only in being working men; associations which employ hired labourers
without any interest in the profits (and I grieve to say that the
Manufacturing Society even of Rochdale has thus degenerated) are, no
doubt, exercising a lawful right in honestly employing the existing
system of society to improve their position as individuals, but it is
not from them that anything need be expected towards replacing that
system by a better. Neither will such societies, in the long run,
succeed in keeping their ground against individual competition.
Individual management, by the one person principally interested, has
great advantages over every description of collective management.
Co-operation has but one thing to oppose to those advantages—the common
interest of all the workers in the work. When individual capitalists, as
they will certainly do, add this to their other points of advantage;
when, even if only to increase their gains, they take up the practice
which these co-operative societies have dropped, and connect the
pecuniary interest of every person in their employment with the most
efficient and most economical management of the concern; they are likely
to gain an easy victory over societies which retain the defects, while
they cannot possess the full advantages, of the old system.

Under the most favourable supposition, it will be desirable, and perhaps
for a considerable length of time, that individual capitalists,
associating their work-people in the profits, should coexist with even
those co-operative societies which are faithful to the co-operative
principle. Unity of authority Edition: current; Page: [793] makes many
things possible, which could not or would not be undertaken subject to
the chance of divided councils or changes in the management. A private
capitalist, exempt from the control of a body, if he is a person of
capacity, is considerably more likely than almost any association to run
judicious risks, and originate costly improvements. Co-operative
societies may be depended on for adopting improvements after they have
been tested by success, but individuals are more likely to commence
things previously untried. Even in ordinary business, the competition of
capable persons who in the event of failure are to have all the loss,
and in case of success the greater part of the gain, will be very useful
in keeping the managers of co-operative societies up to the due pitch of
activity and vigilance.

When, however, co-operative societies shall have sufficiently
multiplied, it is not probable that any but the least valuable
work-people will any longer consent to work all their lives for wages
merely; both private capitalists and associations will gradually find it
necessary to make the entire body of labourers participants in profits.
Eventually, and in perhaps a less remote future than may be supposed, we
may, through the co-operative principle, see our way tooi a change in
society, which would combine the freedom and independence of the
individual, with the moral, intellectual, and economical advantages of
aggregate production; and which, without violence or spoliation, or even
any sudden disturbance of existing habits and expectations, would
realize, at least in the industrial department, the best aspirations of
the democratic spirit, by putting an end to the division of society into
the industrious and the idle, and effacing all social distinctions but
those fairly earned by personal services and exertions. Associations
like those which we have described, by the very process of their
success, are a course of education in those moral and active qualities
by which alone success can be either deserved or attained. As
associations multiplied, they would tend more and more to absorb all
work-people, except those pwho have too little understanding, or too
little virtue, to be capable of learning to act on any other system than
that of narrow selfishnessp. As this change proceeded, owners of capital
would gradually find it to their advantage, instead of maintaining the
struggle of the old system with work-people of only the worst
description, to lend their capital to the associations; to do this at a
diminishing rate of interest, and at last, perhaps, qevenq to exchange
their capital for terminable annuities. In this or some such mode, the
existing accumulations of capital might honestly, and by a kind of
spontaneous process, become in the end the joint property of all who
participate in their productive employment: a transformation Edition:
current; Page: [794] which, thus effected, (and assuming of course that
both sexes participate equally in the rights and in the government of
the association)* would be the nearest approach to social justice, and
the most beneficial ordering of industrial affairs for the universal
good, which it is possible at present to foresee.

§ 7. [Competition is not pernicious, but useful and indispensable] I
agree, then, with the Socialist writers in their conception of the form
which industrial operations tend to assume in the advance of
improvement; and I entirely share their opinion that the time is ripe
for commencing this transformation, and that it should by all just and
effectual means be aided and encouraged. But while I agree and
sympathize with Socialists in this practical portion of their aims, I
utterly dissent from the most conspicuous and vehement part of their
teaching, their declamations against competition. With moral conceptions
in many respects far ahead of the existing arrangements of society, they
have in general very confused and erroneous notions of its actual
working; and one of their greatest errors, as I conceive, is to charge
upon competition all the economical evils which at present exist. They
forget that wherever competition is not, monopoly is; and that monopoly,
in all its forms, is the taxation of the industrious for the support of
indolence, if not of aplundera. They forget, too, that with the
exception of competition among labourers, all other competition is for
the benefit of the labourers, by cheapening the articles they consume;
that competition even in the labour market is a source not of low but of
high wages, wherever the competition for labour exceeds the competition
of labour, as in America, in the colonies, and in the skilled trades;
and never could be a cause of low wages, save by the overstocking of the
labour market bthrough the too great numbers of the labourers’
familiesb; while, if the supply of labourers is excessive, not even
Socialism can prevent ctheirc remuneration Edition: current; Page: [795]
from being low. Besides, if association dwered universal, there would be
no competition between labourer and labourer; and that between
association and association would be for the benefit of the consumers,
that is, of the associations; of the industrious classes generally.

I do not pretend that there are no inconveniences in competition, or
that the moral objections urged against it by Socialist writers, as a
source of jealousy and hostility among those engaged in the same
occupation, are altogether groundless. But if competition has its evils,
it prevents greater evils. As M. Feugueray well says,* “La racine la
plus profonde des maux et des iniquités qui couvrent le monde
industriel, n’est pas la concurrence, mais bien l’exploitation du
travail par le capital, et la part énorme que les possesseurs des
instruments de travail prélèvent sur les produits. . . . Si la
concurrence a beaucoup de puissance pour le mal, elle n’a pas moins de
fécondité pour le bien, surtout en ce qui concerne le développement des
facultés individuelles, et le succès des innovations.” It is the common
error of Socialists to overlook the natural indolence of mankind; their
tendency to be passive, to be the slaves of habit, to persist
indefinitely in a course once chosen. Let them once attain any state of
existence which they consider tolerable, and the danger to be
apprehended is that they will thenceforth stagnate; will not exert
themselves to improve, and by letting their faculties rust, will lose
even the energy required to preserve them from deterioration.
Competition may not be the best conceivable stimulus, but it is at
present a necessary one, and no one can foresee the time when it will
not be indispensable to progress. Even confining ourselves to the
industrial department, in which, more than in any other, the majority
may be supposed to be competent judges of improvements; it would be
difficult to induce the general assembly of an association to submit to
the trouble and inconvenience of altering their habits by adopting some
new and promising invention, unless their knowledge of the existence of
rival associations made them apprehend that what they would not consent
to do, others would, and that they would be left behind in the race.

Instead of looking upon competition as the baneful and anti-social
principle which it is held to be by the generality of Socialists, I
conceive that, even in the present state of society and industry, every
restriction of it is an evil, and every extension of it, even if for the
time injuriously affecting some class of labourers, is always an
ultimate good. To be protected against competition is to be protected in
idleness, in mental dulness; to be saved the necessity of being as
active and as intelligent as other people; and if it is also to be
protected against being underbid for employment by a less ehighlye paid
class of labourers, this is only where Edition: current; Page: [796] old
custom, or local and partial monopoly, has placed some particular class
of artizans in a privileged position as compared with fthe rest; and the
time has come when the interest of universal improvement is no longer
promoted by prolonging the privileges of a few. If the slopsellers and
others gof their classg have lowered the wages of tailors, and some
other artizans, by making them an affair of competition instead of
custom, so much the better in the end. What is now required is not to
bolster up old customs, whereby limited classes of labouring people
obtain partial gains which interest them in keeping up the present
organization of society, but to introduce new general practices
beneficial to all; and there is reason to rejoice at whatever makes the
privileged classes of skilled artizans feel that they have the same
interests, and depend for their remuneration on the same general causes,
and must resort for the improvement of their condition to the same
remedies, as the less fortunately circumstanced and comparatively
helpless multitude.

Edition: current; Page: [797]


BOOK V: ON THE INFLUENCE OF GOVERNMENT

Edition: current; Page: [798] Edition: current; Page: [799]


CHAPTER I: Of the Functions of Government in General

§ 1. [Necessary and optional functions of government distinguished] One
of the most disputed questions both in political science and in
practical statesmanship at this particular period, relates to the proper
limits of the functions and agency of governments. At other times it has
been a subject of controversy how governments should be constituted, and
according to what principles and rules they should exercise their
authority; but it is now almost equally a question, to what departments
of human affairs that authority should extend. And when the tide sets so
strongly towards changes in government and legislation, as a means of
improving the condition of mankind, this discussion is more likely to
increase than to diminish in interest. On the one hand, impatient
reformers, thinking it easier and shorter to get possession of the
government than of the intellects and dispositions of the public, are
under a constant temptation to stretch the province of government beyond
due bounds: while, on the other, mankind have been so much accustomed by
their rulers to interference for purposes other than the public good, or
under an erroneous conception of what that good requires, and so many
rash aproposalsa are made by sincere lovers of improvement, for
attempting, by compulsory regulation, the attainment of objects which
can only be effectually or only usefully compassed by opinion and
discussion, that there has grown up a spirit of resistance in limine to
the interference of government, merely as such, and a disposition to
restrict its sphere of action within the narrowest bounds. From
differences in the historical development of different nations, not
necessary to be here dwelt upon, the former excess, that of exaggerating
the province of government, prevails most, both in theory and in
practice, among the Continental nations, while in England the contrary
spirit bhas hitherto beenb predominant.

The general principles of the question, in so far as it is a question of
principle, I shall make an attempt to determine in a later chapter of
this Book: after first considering the effects produced by the conduct
of government in the exercise of the functions universally acknowledged
to belong Edition: current; Page: [800] to it. For this purpose, there
must be a specification of the functions which are either inseparable
from the idea of a government, or are exercised habitually and without
objection by all governments; as distinguished from those respecting
which it has been considered questionable whether governments should
exercise them or not. The former may be termed the necessary, the latter
the optional, functions of government. cBy the term optional it is not
meant to imply, that it can ever be a matter of indifference, or of
arbitrary choice, whether the government should or should not take upon
itself the functions in question; but only that the expediency of its
exercising them does not amount to necessity, and is a subject on which
diversity of opinion does or may exist.c

§ 2. [Multifarious character of the necessary functions of government]
In attempting to enumerate the necessary functions of government, we
find them to be considerably more multifarious than most people are at
first aware of, and not capable of being circumscribed by those very
definite lines of demarcation, which, in the inconsiderateness of
popular discussion, it is often attempted to draw round them. We
sometimes, for example, hear it said that governments ought to confine
themselves to affording protection against force and fraud: that, these
two things apart, people should be free agents, able to take care of
themselves, and that so long as a person practises no violence or
deception, to the injury of others in person or property, alegislators
and governments are in no way called on to concern themselves about
hima. But why should people be protected by their government, that is,
by their own collective strength, against violence and fraud, and not
against other evils, except that the expediency is more obvious? If
nothing, but what people cannot possibly do for themselves, can be fit
to be done for them by government, people might be required to protect
themselves by their skill and courage even against force, or to beg or
buy protection against it, as they actually do where the government is
not capable of protecting them: and against fraud every one has the
protection of his own wits. But without further anticipating the
discussion of principles, it is sufficient on the present occasion to
consider facts.

Under which of these heads, the repression of force or of fraud, are we
to place the operation, for example, of the laws of inheritance? Some
such laws must exist in all societies. It may be said, perhaps, that in
this matter government has merely to give effect to the disposition
which an individual makes of his own property by will. This, however, is
at least extremely disputable; there is probably no country by whose
laws the power of testamentary disposition is perfectly absolute. And
suppose the very common Edition: current; Page: [801] case of there
being no will: does not the law, that is, the government, decide on
principles of general expediency, who shall take the succession? and in
case the successor is in any manner incompetent, does it not appoint
persons, frequently officers of its own, to collect the property and
apply it to his benefit? There are many other cases in which the
government undertakes the administration of property, because the public
interest, or perhaps only that of the particular persons concerned, is
thought to require it. This is often done in bcaseb of litigated
property; and in cases of judicially declared insolvency. It has never
been contended that in doing these things, a government exceeds its
province.

Nor is the function of the law in defining property itself, so simple a
thing as may be supposed. It may be imagined, perhaps, that the law has
only to declare and protect the right of every one to what he has
himself produced, or acquired by the voluntary consent, fairly obtained,
of those who produced it. But is there nothing recognised as property
except what has been produced? Is there not the earth itself, its
forests and waters, and all other natural riches, above and below the
surface? These are the inheritance of the human race, and there must be
regulations for the common enjoyment of it. What rights, and under what
conditions, a person shall be allowed to exercise over any portion of
this common inheritance, cannot be left undecided. No function of
government is less optional than the regulation of these things, or more
completely involved in the idea of civilized society.

Again, the legitimacy is conceded of repressing violence or treachery;
but under which of these heads are we to place the obligation imposed on
people to perform their contracts? Non-performance does not necessarily
imply fraud; the person who entered into the contract may have sincerely
intended to fulfil itc: and the term fraud, which can scarcely admit of
being extended even to the case of voluntary breach of contract when no
deception was practised, is certainly not applicable when the omission
to perform is a case of negligencec. Is it no part of the duty of
governments to enforce contracts? Here the doctrine of non-interference
would no doubt be stretched a little, and it would be said, that
enforcing contracts is not regulating the affairs of individuals at the
pleasure of government, but giving effect to their own expressed desire.
Let us acquiesce in this enlargement of the restrictive theory, and take
it for what it is worth. But governments do not limit their concern with
contracts to a simple enforcement. They take upon themselves to
determine what contracts are fit to be enforced. It is not enough that
one person, not being either cheated or compelled, makes a promise to
another. There are promises by which it is not for the Edition: current;
Page: [802] public good that persons should have the power of binding
themselves. To say nothing of engagements to do something contrary to
law, there are engagements which the law refuses to enforce, for reasons
connected with the interest of the promiser, or with the general policy
of the state. A contract by which a person sells himself to another as a
slave, would be declared void by the tribunals of this and of most other
European countries. There are few nations whose laws denforce a contract
for what eise looked upon as prostitution, or any matrimonial engagement
of which the conditions fvaryf in any respect from those which the law
ghasg thought fit to prescribe. But when once it is admitted that there
are any engagements which for reasons of expediency the law ought not to
enforce, the same question is necessarily opened with respect to all
engagements. Whether, for example, the law should enforce a contract to
labour, when the wages are too low or the hours of work too severe:
whether it should enforce a contract by which a person binds himself to
remain, for more than a very limited period, in the service of a given
individual: whether a contract of marriage, entered into for life,
should continue to be enforced against the deliberate will of the
persons, or of either of the persons, who entered into it. Every
question which can possibly arise as to the policy of contracts, and of
the relations which they establish among human beings, is a question for
the legislator; and one which he cannot escape from considering, and in
some way or other deciding.

Again, the prevention and suppression of force and fraud afford
appropriate employment for soldiers, policemen, and criminal judges; but
there are also civil tribunals. The punishment of wrong is one business
of an administration of justice, but hthe decision of disputes is
another.h Innumerable disputes arise between persons, without mala fides
on either side, through misconception of their legal rights, or from not
being agreed about the facts, on the proof of which those rights are
legally dependent. It is not for the general interest that the State
should appoint persons to clear up these uncertainties and terminate
these disputes? It cannot be said to be a case of absolute necessity.
People might appoint an arbitrator, and engage to submit to his
decision; and they do so where there are no courts of justice, or where
the courts are not trusted, or where their delays and expenses, or the
irrationality of their rules of evidence, deter people from resorting to
them. Still, it is universally thought right that the State should
establish civil tribunals; and if their defects often drive people to
have recourse to substitutes, even then the power held in reserve of
carrying the case before a legally constituted court, gives to the
substitutes their principal efficacy.

Edition: current; Page: [803]
Not only does the State undertake to decide disputes, it takes
precautions beforehand that disputes may not arise. The laws of most
countries lay down rules for determining many things, not because it is
of much consequence in what way they are determined, but in order that
they may be determined somehow, and there may be no question on the
subject. The law prescribes forms of words for many kinds of contract,
in order that no dispute or misunderstanding may arise about their
meaning: it makes provision that if a dispute does arise, evidence shall
be procurable for deciding it, by requiring that the document be
attested by witnesses and executed with certain formalities. The law
preserves authentic evidence of facts to which legal consequences are
attached, by keeping a registry of such facts; as of births, deaths, and
marriages, of wills and contracts, and of judicial proceedings. In doing
these things, it has never been alleged that government oversteps the
proper limits of its functions.

Again, however wide a scope we may allow to the doctrine that
individuals are the proper guardians of their own interests, and that
government owes nothing to them but to save them from being interfered
with by other people, the doctrine can never be applicable to any
persons but those who are capable of acting in their own behalf. The
individual may be an infant, or a lunatic, or fallen into imbecility.
The law surely must look after the interests of such persons. It does
not necessarily do this through officers of its own. It ioften devolvesi
the trust upon some relative or connexion. But in doing so is its duty
ended? Can it make over the interests of one person to the control of
another, and be excused from supervision, or from holding the person
thus trusted, responsible for the discharge of the trust?

There is a multitude of cases in which governments, with general
approbation, assume powers and execute functions for which no reason can
be assigned except the simple one, that they conduce to general
convenience. We may take as an example, the jfunctionj (which is a
monopoly too) of coining money. This is assumed for no more recondite
purpose than that of saving to individuals the trouble, delay, and
expense of weighing and assaying. No one, however, even of those most
jealous of state interference, has objected to this as an improper
exercise of the powers of government. Prescribing a set of standard
weights and measures is another instance. Paving, lighting, and
cleansing the streets and thoroughfares, is another; whether done by the
general government, or as is more usual, and generally more advisable,
by a municipal authority. Making or improving harbours, building
lighthouses, making surveys in order to have accurate maps and charts,
raising dykes to keep the sea out, and embankments to keep rivers in,
are cases in point.

Examples might be indefinitely multiplied without intruding on any
disputed ground. But enough has been said to show that the admitted
Edition: current; Page: [804] functions of government embrace a much
wider field than can easily be included within the ring-fence of any
restrictive definition, and that it is hardly possible to find any
ground of justification common to them all, except the comprehensive one
of general expediency; nor to limit the interference of government by
any universal rule, save the simple and vague one, that it should never
be admitted but when the case of expediency is strong.

§ 3. [Division of the subject] Some observations, however, may be
usefully bestowed on the nature of the considerations on which the
question of government interference is most likely to turn, and on the
mode of estimating the comparative magnitude of the expediencies
involved. This will form the last of the three parts, into which our
discussion of the principles and effects of government interference may
conveniently be divided. The following will be our division of the
subject.

We shall first consider the economical effects arising from the manner
in which governments perform their necessary and acknowledged functions.

We shall then pass to certain governmental interferences of what I have
termed the optional kind (i.e. overstepping the boundaries of the
universally acknowledged functions) which have heretofore taken place,
and in some cases still take place, under the influence of false general
theories.

It will lastly remain to inquire whether, independently of any false
theory, and consistently with a correct view of the laws which regulate
human affairs, there be any cases of the optional class in which
governmental interference is really advisable, and what are those cases.

The first of these divisions is of an extremely miscellaneous character:
since the necessary functions of government, and those which are so
manifestly expedient that they have never or very rarely been objected
to, are, as already pointed out, too various to be brought under any
very simple classification. Those, however, which are of principal
importance, which alone it is necessary here to consider, may be reduced
to the following general heads.

First, the means adopted by governments to raise the revenue which is
the condition of their existence.

Secondly, the nature of the laws which they prescribe on the two great
subjects of Property and Contracts.

Thirdly, the excellences or defects of the system of means by which they
enforce generally the execution of their laws, namely, their judicature
and police.

We commence with the first head, that is, with the theory of Taxation.

Edition: current; Page: [805]


CHAPTER II: aOna the General Principles of Taxation

§ 1. [Four fundamental rules of taxation] The qualities desirable,
economically speaking, in a system of taxation, have been embodied by
Adam Smith in four maxims or principles, which, having been generally
concurred in by subsequent writers, may be said to have become
classical, and this chapter cannot be better commenced than by quoting
them.*

“1. The subjects of every state ought to contribute to the support of
the government, as nearly as possible in proportion to their respective
abilities: that is, in proportion to the revenue which they respectively
enjoy under the protection of the state. In the observation or neglect
of this maxim consists what is called the equality or inequality of
taxation.

“2. The tax which each individual is bound to pay ought to be certain,
and not arbitrary. The time of payment, the manner of payment, the
quantity to be paid, ought all to be clear and plain to the contributor,
and to every other person. Where it is otherwise, every person subject
to the tax is put more or less in the power of the tax-gatherer, who can
either aggravate the tax upon any obnoxious contributor, or extort by
the terror of such aggravation, some present or perquisite to himself.
The uncertainty of taxation encourages the insolence and favours the
corruption of an order of men who are naturally unpopular, even when
they are neither insolent nor corrupt. The certainty of what each
individual ought to pay is, in taxation, a matter of so great
importance, that a very considerable degree of inequality, it appears, I
believe, from the experience of all nations, is not near so great an
evil, as a very small degree of uncertainty.

“3. Every tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the manner, in which
it is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay it. A tax
upon the rent of land or of houses, payable at the same term at which
such rents are usually paid, is levied at bab time when it is most
likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay; or when he is most
likely to have wherewithal Edition: current; Page: [806] to pay. Taxes
upon such consumable goods as are articles of luxury, are all finally
paid by the consumer, and generally in a manner that is very convenient
to him. He pays them by little and little, as he has occasion to buy the
goods. As he is at liberty, too, either to buy or not to buy, as he
pleases, it must be his own fault if he ever suffers any considerable
inconvenience from such taxes.

“4. Every tax ought to be so contrived as both to take out and to keep
out of the pockets of the people as little as possible over and above
what it brings into the public treasury of the state. A tax may either
take out or keep out of the pockets of the people a great deal more than
it brings into the public treasury, in the four following ways. First,
the levying of it may require a great number of officers, whose salaries
may eat up the greater part of the produce of the tax, and whose
perquisites may impose another additional tax upon the people.”
Secondly, it may divert a portion of the labour and capital of the
community from a more to a less productive employment. “Thirdly, by the
forfeitures and other penalties which those unfortunate individuals
incur who attempt unsuccessfully to evade the tax, it may frequently
ruin them, and thereby put an end to the benefit which the community
might have derived from the employment of their capitals. An injudicious
tax offers a great temptation to smuggling. Fourthly, by subjecting the
people to the frequent visits and the odious examination of the
tax-gatherers, it may expose them to much unnecessary trouble, vexation,
and oppression:” to which may be added, that the restrictive regulations
to which trades and manufactures are often subjected to prevent evasion
of a tax, are not only in themselves troublesome and expensive, but
often oppose insuperable obstacles to making cimprovementsc in the
dprocessesd.

The last three of these four maxims require little other explanation or
illustration than is contained in the passage itself. How far any given
tax conforms to, or conflicts with them, is a matter to be considered in
the discussion of particular taxes. But the first of the four points,
equality of taxation, requires to be more fully examined, being a thing
often imperfectly understood, and on which many false notions have
become to a certain degree accredited, through the absence of any
definite principles of judgment in the popular mind.

§ 2. [Grounds of the principle of Equality of Taxation] For what reason
ought equality to be the rule in matters of taxation? For the reason,
that it ought to be so in all affairs of government. As a government
ought to make Edition: current; Page: [807] no distinction of persons or
classes in the strength of their claims on it, whatever sacrifices it
requires from them should be made to bear as nearly as possible with the
same pressure upon all, which, it must be observed, is the mode by which
least sacrifice is occasioned on the whole. If any one bears less than
his fair share of the burthen, some other person must suffer more than
his share, and the alleviation to the one is not, cæteris paribus, so
great a good to him, as the increased pressure upon the other is an
evil. Equality of taxation, therefore, as a maxim of politics, means
equality of sacrifice. It means apportioning the contribution of each
person towards the expenses of government, so that he shall feel neither
more nor less inconvenience from his share of the payment than every
other person experiences from his. This standard, like other standards
of perfection, cannot be completely realized; but the first object in
every practical discussion should be to know what perfection is.

There are persons, however, who are not content with the general
principles of justice as a basis to ground a rule of finance upon, but
must have something, as they think, more specifically appropriate to the
subject. What best pleases them is, to regard the taxes paid by each
member of the community as an equivalent for value received, in the
shape of service to himself; and they prefer to rest the justice of
making each contribute in proportion to his means, upon the ground, that
he who has twice as much property to be protected, receives, on an
accurate calculation, twice as much protection, and ought, on the
principles of bargain and sale, to pay twice as much for it. Since,
however, the assumption that government exists solely for the protection
of property, is not one to be deliberately adhered to; some consistent
adherents of the quid pro quo principle go on to observe, that
protection being required for person as well as property, and
everybody’s person receiving the same amount of protection, a poll-tax
of a fixed sum per head is a proper equivalent for this part of the
benefits of government, while the remaining part, protection to
property, should be paid for in proportion to property. There is in this
adjustment a false air of nice adaptation, very acceptable to some
minds. But in the first place, it is not admissible that the protection
of apersons and that ofa property are the sole purposes of government.
The ends of government are as comprehensive as those of the social
union. They consist of all the good, and all the immunity from evil,
which the existence of government can be made either directly or
indirectly to bestow. In the second place, the practice of setting
definite values on things essentially indefinite, and making them a
ground of practical conclusions, is peculiarly fertile in false views of
social questions. It cannot be admitted, that to be protected in the
ownership of ten Edition: current; Page: [808] times as much property,
is to be ten times as much protected. bNeither can it be truly said that
the protection of 1000l. a year costs the state ten times as much as
that of 100l. a year, rather than twice as much, or exactly as much. The
same judges, soldiers, and sailors who protect the one protect the
other, and the larger income does not necessarily, though it may
sometimes, require even more policemen.b Whether the labour and expense
of the protection, or the feelings of the protected person, or any other
definite thing be made the standard, there is no such proportion as the
one supposed, nor any other definable proportion. If we wanted to
estimate the degrees of benefit which different persons derive from the
protection of government, we should have to consider who would suffer
most if that protection were withdrawn: to which question if any answer
could be made, it must be, that those would suffer most who were weakest
in mind or body, either by nature or by position. Indeed, such persons
would almost infallibly be slaves. If there were any justice, therefore,
in the theory of justice now under consideration, those who are least
capable of helping or defending themselves, being those to whom the
protection of government is the most indispensable, ought to pay the
greatest share of its price: the reverse of the true idea of
distributive justice, which consists not in imitating but in redressing
the inequalities and wrongs of nature.

Government must be regarded as so pre-eminently a concern of all, that
to determine who carec most interested in it is of no real importance.
If a person or class of persons receive so small a share of the benefit
as makes it necessary to raise the question, there is something else
than taxation which is amiss, and the thing to be done is to remedy the
defect, dinstead of recognising it and makingd it a ground for demanding
less taxes. As, in a case of voluntary subscription for a purpose in
which all are interested, all are thought to have done their part fairly
when each has contributed according to his means, that is, has made an
equal sacrifice for the common object; in like manner should this be the
principle of compulsory contributions: and it is superfluous to look for
a more ingenious or recondite ground to rest the principle upon.

§ 3. [Should the same percentage be levied on all amounts of income?]
Setting out, then, from the maxim that equal sacrifices ought to be
demanded from all, we have next to inquire whether this is in fact done,
by making each contribute the same percentage on his pecuniary means.
Many persons maintain the negative, saying that a tenth part taken from
a small income is a heavier burthen than the same fraction deducted from
one much larger: and on this is grounded the very popular scheme of what
Edition: current; Page: [809] is called a graduated property tax, viz.
an income tax in which the percentage rises with the amount of the
income.

On the best consideration I am able to give to this question, it appears
to me that the portion of truth which the doctrine contains, arises
principally from the difference between a tax which can be saved from
luxuries, and one which trenches, in ever so small a degree, upon the
necessaries of life. To take a thousand a year from the possessor of ten
thousand, would not deprive him of anything really conducive either to
the support or to the comfort of existence; and if such would be the
effect of taking five pounds from one whose income is fifty, the
sacrifice required from the last is not only greater than, but entirely
incommensurable with, that imposed upon the first. The mode of adjusting
these inequalities of pressure, which seems to be the most equitable, is
that recommended by Bentham, of leaving a certain minimum of income,
sufficient to provide the necessaries of life, untaxed. Suppose 50l. a
year to be asufficient to provide the number of persons ordinarily
supported from a single income,a with the requisites of life and health,
and with protection against habitual bodily suffering, but not with any
bindulgenceb. This then should be made the minimum, and incomes
exceeding it should pay taxes not upon their whole amount, but upon the
surplus. If the tax be ten per cent, an income of 60l. should be
considered as a net income of 10l., and charged with 1l. a year, while
an income of 1000l. should be charged as one of 950l. Each would then
pay a fixed proportion, not of his whole means, but of his
superfluities.* An income not exceeding 50l. should not be taxed at all,
either directly or by taxes on necessaries; for as by supposition this
is the smallest income which clabour ought to be able to commandc, the
government ought not to be a party to making it smaller. This
arrangement however would constitute a reason, in addition to others
which might be stated, for maintaining dtaxes on articles of luxury
consumed by the poor. The immunity extended to the income required for
necessaries, should depend on its being actually expended for that
purpose; and the poor who, not having more than enough for necessaries,
divert any part of it to indulgences, should like other people
contribute their quota out of those indulgences to the expenses of the
state.

The exemption in favour of the smaller incomes should not, I think, be
stretched further than to the amount of income needful for life, health,
and Edition: current; Page: [810] immunity from bodily pain. eIf 50l. a
year is sufficient (which may be doubted) for these purposes, ane income
of 100l. a year would, as it seems to me, obtain all the relief it is
entitled to, compared with one of 1000l., by being taxed only on 50l. of
its amount. It may be said, indeed, that to take 100l. from 1000l. (even
giving back five pounds) is a heavier impost than 1000l. taken from
10,000l. (giving back the same five pounds). But this doctrine seems to
me too disputable altogether, and even if true at all, not true to a
sufficient extent, to be made the foundation of any rule of taxation.
fWhether the person with 10,000l. a year cares less for 1000l. than the
person with only 1000l. a year cares for 100l., and if so, how much
less, does not appear to me capable of being decided with the degree of
certainty on which a legislator or a financier ought to act.f

Some indeed contend that gtheg rule of hproportionalh taxation bears
harder upon the moderate than upon the large incomes, because the same
proportional payment has more tendency in the former case than in the
latter, to reduce the payer to a lower grade of social rank. The fact
appears to me more than questionable. But even admitting it, I object to
its being considered incumbent on government to shape its course by such
considerations, or to recognise the notion that social importance is or
can be determined by amount of expenditure. Government ought to set an
example of rating all things at their true value, and riches, therefore,
at the worth, for comfort or pleasure, of the things which they will
buy: and ought not to sanction the vulgarity of prizing them for the
pitiful vanity of being known to possess them, or the ipaltry shame of
being suspected to be without them, the presiding motives of
three-fourths of the expenditure of the middle classes. The sacrifices
of real comfort or indulgence which government requires, it is bound to
apportion among all persons with as much equality as possible; but their
sacrifices of the imaginary dignity dependent on expense, it may spare
itself the trouble of estimating.

Both in England and on the Continent a graduated property tax (l’impôt
progressif) has been advocated, on the avowed ground that the state
should use the instrument of taxation as a means of mitigating the
inequalities of wealth. I am as desirous as any one, that means should
be taken to diminish those inequalities, but not so as to jrelieve the
prodigal at the expense of the prudentj. To tax the larger incomes at a
higher percentage than the Edition: current; Page: [811] smaller, is to
lay a tax on industry and economy; to impose a penalty on people for
having worked harder and saved more than their neighbours. It is knot
the fortunes which are earned, but those which are unearned, that it is
for the public good to place under limitationk. A just and wise
legislation would labstain from mholding out motives for dissipating
rather than saving the earnings ofm honest exertion. Its impartiality
between competitors would consist in endeavouring that they should all
start fair, and not nin hanging a weight upon the swift to diminish the
distance between them and the slown. Many, indeed, fail with greater
efforts than those with which others succeed, not from difference of
merits, but difference of opportunities; obut if all were done which it
would be in the power of a good government to do, by instruction and by
legislation, to pdiminishp this inequality of opportunities, the
differenceso of fortune arising from people’s own earnings could not
justly give umbrage. With respect to the large fortunes acquired by gift
or inheritance, the power of bequeathing qis one of those privileges of
property which are fit subjects for regulation on grounds of general
expediency; and I have already suggested,* as ra possibler mode of
restraining the accumulation of large fortunes in the hands of those who
have not earned them by exertion, a limitation of the amount which any
one person should be permitted to acquire by gift, bequest, or
inheritance. Apart from this, and from the proposal of Bentham (also
discussed in a former chapter) that collateral inheritance ab intestato
should cease, and the property escheat to the state, I conceive that
inheritances and legacies, exceeding a certain amount, are highly proper
subjects for taxation: and that the revenue from them should be as great
as it can be made without giving rise to evasions, by donation inter
vivos or concealment of property, such as it would be impossible
adequately to check. The principle of graduation (as it is called,) that
is, of levying a larger percentage Edition: current; Page: [812] on a
larger sum, though its application to general taxation would be sin my
opinion objectionable, tseems to met both just and expedients as applied
to legacy and inheritance duties.

The objection to a graduated property tax applies in an aggravated
degree to the proposition of an exclusive tax on what is called
“realized property,” that is, property not forming a part of any capital
engaged in business, or uratheru in business vunder the superintendence
of the ownerv: as land, the public funds, money lent on mortgage, and
shares (I presume) in joint stock companies. Except the proposal of
applying a sponge to the national debt, no such palpable violation of
common honesty has found sufficient support in this country, during the
present generation, to be regarded as within the domain of discussion.
It has not the palliation of a graduated property tax, that of laying
the burthen on those best able to bear it; for “realized property”
includes wthe far larger portion of thew provision made for those who
are unable to work, and consists, in great part, of extremely small
fractions. I can hardly conceive a more shameless pretension, than that
the major part of the property of the country, that of merchants,
manufacturers, farmers, and shopkeepers, should be exempted from its
share of taxation; that these classes should only begin to pay their
proportion after retiring from business, and if they never retire should
be excused from it altogether. But even this does not give an adequate
idea of the injustice of the proposition. The burthen thus exclusively
thrown on the owners of the smaller portion of the wealth of the
community, would not even be a burthen on that class of persons in
perpetual succession, but would fall exclusively on those who happened
to compose it when the tax was laid on. As land and those particular
securities would xthenceforthx yield a smaller net income, relatively to
the general interest of capital and to the profits of trade; the balance
would rectify itself by a permanent depreciation of those kinds of
property. Future buyers would acquire land and securities at a reduction
of price, equivalent to the peculiar tax, which tax they would,
therefore, escape from paying; while the original possessors would
remain burthened with it even after parting with the property, since
they would have sold their land or securities at a loss of value
equivalent to the fee-simple of the tax. Its imposition would thus be
tantamount to the confiscation for public uses of a percentage of their
property, equal to the percentage laid on their income by the tax. That
such a proposition should find any favour, is a striking instance of the
want of conscience in matters of taxation, resulting from the absence of
any fixed principles in the public Edition: current; Page: [813] mind,
and of any indication of a sense of justice on the subject in the
general conduct of ygovernmentsy. Should the scheme ever enlist a large
party in its support, the fact would indicate a laxity of pecuniary
integrity in national affairs, scarcely inferior to American
repudiation.

§ 4. [Should the same percentage be levied on perpetual and on
terminable incomes?] Whether the profits of trade may not rightfully be
taxed at a alower rate than incomes derived from interest or rent, is
part of the more comprehensive question, so often mooted on the occasion
of the present income tax, whether life incomes should be subjected to
the same rate of taxation as perpetual incomes: whether salaries, for
example, or annuities, or the gains of professions, should pay the same
percentage as the income from inheritable property.

The existing tax treats all kinds of incomes exactly alike, taking bitsb
csevenpence (now fourpence)c in the pound, as well from the person whose
income dies with him, as from the dlandholderd, stockholder, or
mortgagee, who can transmit his fortune undiminished to his descendants.
This is a visible injustice: yet it does not arithmetically violate the
rule that taxation ought to be in proportion to means. When it is said
that a temporary income ought to be taxed less than a permanent one, the
reply is irresistible, that it is taxed less; for the income which lasts
only ten years pays the tax only ten years, while that which lasts for
ever pays for ever. eOn this point some financial reformers are guilty
of a great fallacy. They contend that incomes ought to be assessed to
the income tax not in proportion to their annual amount, but to their
capitalized value: that, for example, if the value of a perpetual
annuity of 100l. is 3000l., and a life annuity of the same amount, being
worth only half the number of years’ purchase, could only be sold for
1500l., the perpetual income should pay twice as much per cent income
tax as the terminable income: if the one pays 10l. a year the other
should pay only 5l. But in this argument there is the obvious oversight,
that it values the incomes by one standard and the payments by another;
it capitalizes the incomes, but forgets to capitalize the payments. An
annuity worth 3000l. ought, it is alleged, to be taxed twice as highly
as one which is only worth 1500l., and no assertion can be more
unquestionable; but it is forgotten that the income worth 3000l. pays to
the supposed income tax 10l. a year in perpetuity, which is equivalent,
by supposition, to 300l., while the terminable income pays the same 10l.
only during the Edition: current; Page: [814] life of its owner, which
on the same calculation is a value of 150l.f, and could actually be
bought for that sum.f Already, therefore, the income which is only half
as valuable, pays only half as much to the tax; and if in addition to
this its annual quota were reduced from 10l. to 5l., it would pay, not
half, but a fourth part only of the payment demanded from the perpetual
income. gTo make it just that the one income should pay only half as
much per annum as the other, it would be necessary that it should pay
that half for the same period, that is, in perpetuity.g

hThe rule of payment which this school of financial reformers contend
for, would be very proper if the tax were only to be levied once, to
meet some national emergency. On the principle of requiring from all
payers an equal sacrifice, every person who had anything belonging to
him, reversioners included, would be called on for a payment
proportioned to the present value of his property. I wonder it does not
occur to the reformers in question, that precisely because this
principle of assessment would be just in the case of a payment made once
for all, it cannot possibly be just for a permanent tax. When each pays
only once, one person pays no oftener than another; and the proportion
which would be just in that case, cannot also be just if one person has
to make the payment only once, and the other several times. This,
however, is the type of the case which actually occurs. The permanent
incomes pay the tax as much oftener than the temporary ones, as a
perpetuity exceeds the certain or uncertain length of time which forms
the duration of the income for life or years.h

All attempts to establish a claim in favour of terminable incomes on
numerical grounds—to make out, in short, that a proportional tax is not
a proportional tax—are manifestly absurd. The claim does not rest on
grounds of arithmetic, but of human iwants and feelingsi. jIt is not
because the temporary annuitant has smaller means, but because he has
greater knecessitiesk, that he ought to be assessed at a lower rate.j

Ine spite of the nominal equality of income, A, an annuitant of 1000l. a
year, cannot so well afford to pay 100l. out of it, as B who derives the
same annual sum from heritable property; A having usually a demand on
his income which B has not, namely, to provide by saving for children or
others; to which, in the case of salaries or professional gains, must
generally be added a provision for his own later years; while B may
expend his whole income without injury to his old age, and still have it
all to bestow on others after his death. If A, in order to meet these
exigencies, must lay by 300l. of his income, to take 100l. from him as
income tax is lto takel Edition: current; Page: [815] 100l. from 700l.,
since it must be retrenched from that part only of his means which he
can afford to spend on his own consumption. Were he to throw it rateably
on what he spends and on what he saves, abating 70l. from his
consumption and 30l. from his annual saving, then indeed his immediate
sacrifice would be mproportionatelym the same as B’s: but then his
children or his old age would be worse provided for in consequence of
the taxn. The capital sum which would be accumulated for them would be
one-tenth less, and on the reduced income afforded by this reduced
capital, they would be a second time charged with income taxo; while
pB’sp heirs would only be charged onceo.n

The principle, therefore, of equality of taxation, interpreted in its
only just sense, equality of sacrifice, requires that a person who has
no means of providing for old age, or for those in whom he is
interested, except by saving from qincome, should have the tax remitted
on all that part of his income which is really and bonâ fide applied to
that purpose.r

sIf, indeed, reliance could be placed on the conscience of the
contributors, or sufficient security taken for the correctness of their
statements by collateral precautions, the proper mode of assessing an
income tax would be to tax only the part of income devoted to
expenditure, exempting that which is saved. For when saved and invested
(and all savings, speaking generally, are invested) it thenceforth pays
income tax on the interest or Edition: current; Page: [816] profit which
it brings, notwithstanding that it has already been taxed on the
principal. Unless, therefore, savings are exempted from income tax, the
contributors are twice taxed on what they save, and only once on what
they spend. A person who spends all he receives, pays 7d. in the pound,
or say three per cent, to the tax, and no more; but if he saves part of
the year’s income and buys stock, then in addition to the three per cent
which he has paid on the principal, and which diminishes the interest in
the same ratio, he pays three per cent annually on the interest itself,
which is equivalent to an immediate payment of a second three per cent
on the principal. So that while unproductive expenditure pays only three
per cent, savings pay six per cent: or more correctly, three per cent on
the whole, and another three per cent on the remaining ninety-seven. The
difference thus created to the disadvantage of prudence and economy, is
not only impolitic but unjust. To tax the sum invested, and afterwards
tax also the proceeds of the investment, is to tax the same portion of
the contributor’s means twice over. The principal and the interest
cannot both together form part of his resources; they are the same
portion twice counted: if he has the interest, it is because he abstains
from using the principal; if he tspendst the principal, he does not
receive the interest. Yet because he can do either of the two, he is
taxed as if he could do both, and could have the benefit of the saving
and that of the spending, uconcurrentlyu with one another.

vIt has been urged as an objection to exempting savings from taxation,
that the law ought not to disturb, by artificial interference, the
natural competition between the motives for saving and those for
spending. But we have seen that the law disturbs this natural
competition when it taxes savings, not when it spares them; for as the
savings pay at any rate the full tax as soon as they are invested, their
exemption from payment in the earlier stage is necessary to prevent them
from paying twice, while money spent in unproductive consumption pays
only once. It has been further objected, that since the rich have the
greatest means of saving, any privilege given to savings is an advantage
bestowed on the rich at the expense of the poor. I answer, that it is
bestowed on them only in proportion as they abdicate the personal use of
their riches; in proportion as they divert their income from the supply
of their own wants, to a productive investment, through which, instead
of being consumed by themselves, it is distributed in wages among the
poor. If this be favouring the rich, I should like to have it pointed
out, what mode of assessing taxation can deserve the name of favouring
the poor.v

No income tax is really just, from which savings are not exempted; and
no income tax ought to be voted without that provision, if the form of
the returns, and the nature of the evidence required, could be so
arranged as Edition: current; Page: [817] to prevent the exemption from
being taken fraudulent advantage of, by saving with one hand and getting
into debt with the other, or by spending in the following year what had
been passed tax-free as saving in the year preceding. If this difficulty
could be surmounted, the difficulties and complexities arising from the
comparative claims of temporary and permanent incomes, would disappear;
for, since temporary incomes have no just claim to lighter taxation than
permanent incomes, except in so far as their possessors are more called
upon to save, the exemption of what they do save would fully satisfy the
claim. But if no plan can be devised for the exemption of actual
savings, sufficiently free from liability to fraud, it is necessary, as
the next thing in point of justice, to take into account in assessing
the tax, what the different classes of contributors ought to save. And
there would probably be no other mode of doing this thans the rough
expedient of two different rates of assessment. There would be great
difficulty in taking into account differences of duration between one
terminable income and another; and in the most frequent case, that of
incomes dependent on life, differences of age and health would
constitute such extreme diversity as it would be impossible to take
proper cognizance of. It would probably be necessary to be content with
one uniform rate for all incomes of inheritance, and another uniform
rate for all those which necessarily terminate with the life of the
individual. In fixing the proportion between the two rates, there must
inevitably be something arbitrary; perhaps a deduction of one-fourth in
favour of life-incomes would be as little objectionable as any which
could be made, it being thus assumed that one-fourth of a life-income
is, on the average of all ages and states of health, a suitable
proportion to be laid by as a provision for successors and for old age.*

Edition: current; Page: [818]
Of the net profits of persons in business, wa part, as before observedw,
may be considered as interest on capital, and of a perpetual character,
and the xremaining partx as remuneration for the skill and labour of
superintendencey. The surplus beyond interest dependsy on the life of
the individual, and even on his continuance in businessz, and is
entitled to the full amount of exemption allowed to terminable incomes.
It has also, I conceive, a just claim to a further amount of exemption
in consideration of its precariousness. An income which some not unusual
vicissitude may reduce to nothing, or even convert into a loss, is not
the same thing to the feelings of the possessor as a permanent income of
1000l. a year, even though on an average of years it may yield 1000l. a
year. If life-incomes were assessed at three-fourths of their amount,
the profits of business, after deducting Edition: current; Page: [819]
interest on capital, should not only be assessed at three-fourths, but
should pay, on that assessment, a lower rate. Or perhaps the claims of
justice in this respect might be sufficiently met by allowing the
deduction of a fourth on the entire income, interest included.z

These are the chief cases, of ordinary occurrence, in which any
difficulty arises in interpreting the maxim of equality of taxation. The
proper sense to be put upon it, as we have seen in the preceding
example, is, that people should be taxed, not in proportion to what they
have, but to what they can afford to spend. It is no objection to this
principle that we cannot apply it consistently to all cases. A person
with a life-income and precarious health, or who has many persons
depending on his exertions, must, if he wishes to provide for them after
his death, be more rigidly economical than one who has a life-income of
equal amount with a strong constitution, and few claims upon him; and
aif it be conceded thata taxation cannot accommodate itself to these
distinctions, it is argued that there is no use in attending to any
distinctions, where the absolute amount of income is the same. But the
bdifficultyb of doing perfect justice is no reason against doing as much
as we can. Though it may be a hardship to an annuitant whose life is
only worth five years’ purchase, to be allowed no greater abatement than
is granted to one whose life is worth twenty, it is better for him even
so, than if neither of them were allowed any abatement at all.

§ 5. [The increase of the rent of land from natural causes is a fit
subject of peculiar taxation] Before leaving the subject of Equality of
Taxation, I must remark that there are cases in which exceptions may be
made to it, consistently with that equal justice which is the groundwork
of the rule. Suppose that there is a kind of income which constantly
tends to increase, without any exertion or sacrifice on the part of the
owners: those owners constituting a class in the community, whom the
natural course of things progressively enriches, consistently with
complete passiveness on their own part. In such a case it would be no
violation of the principles on which private property is grounded, if
the state should appropriate this increase of wealth, or part of it, as
it arises. This would not properly be taking anything from anybody; it
would merely be applying an accession of wealth, created by
circumstances, to the benefit of society, instead of allowing it to
become an unearned appendage to the riches of a particular class.

Now this is actually the case with rent. The ordinary progress of a
society which increases in wealth, is at all times tending to augment
the incomes of landlords; to give them both a greater amount and a
greater proportion of the wealth of the community, independently of any
trouble or outlay incurred by themselves. They grow richer, as it were
in their sleep, Edition: current; Page: [820] without working, risking,
or economizing. What claim have they, on the general aprinciplea of
social justice, to this accession of riches? In what would they have
been wronged if society had, from the beginning, reserved btheb right of
taxing the spontaneous increase of rent, to the highest amount required
by financial exigencies? I admit that it would be unjust to come upon
each individual estate, and lay hold of the increase which might be
found to have taken place in its rental; because there would be no
cmeansc of distinguishing in individual cases, between an increase owing
solely to the general circumstances of society, and one which was the
effect of skill and expenditure on the part of the proprietor. The only
admissible mode of proceeding would be by a general measure. The first
step should be a valuation of all the land in the country. The present
value of all land should be exempt from the tax; but after an interval
had elapsed, during which society had increased in population and
capital, a rough estimate might be made of the spontaneous increase
which had accrued to rent since the valuation was made. Of this the
average price of produce would be some criterion: if that had risen, it
would be certain that rent had increased, and (as already shown) even in
a greater ratio than the rise of price. On this and other data, an
approximate estimate might be made, how much value had been added to the
land of the country by natural causes; and in laying on a general
land-tax, which for fear of miscalculation should be considerably within
the amount thus indicated, there would be an assurance of not touching
any increase of income which might be the result of capital expended or
industry exerted by the proprietor.

But though there could be no question as to the justice of taxing the
increase of rent, if society had avowedly reserved the right, has not
society waived that right by not exercising it? In England, for example,
have not all who bought land for the last century or more, given value
not only for the existing income, but for the prospects of increase,
under an implied assurance of being only taxed in the same proportion
with other incomes? This objection, in so far as valid, has a different
degree of validity in different countries; depending on the degree of
desuetude into which society has allowed a right to fall, which, as no
one can doubt, it once fully possessed. In most countries of Europe, the
right to take by taxation, as exigency might require, an indefinite
portion of the rent of land, has never been allowed to slumber. In
several parts of the Continent, the land-tax forms a large proportion of
the public revenues, and has always been confessedly liable to be raised
or lowered without reference to other taxes. In these countries no one
can pretend to have become the owner of land on the faith of never being
called upon to pay an increased land-tax. In England the land-tax has
not varied since the early part of the last century. Edition: current;
Page: [821] The last act of the legislature in relation to its amount,
was to diminish it; and though the subsequent increase in the rental of
the country has been immense, not only from agriculture, but from the
growth of towns and the increase of buildings, the ascendency of
landholders in the legislature has prevented any tax from being imposed,
as it so justly might, upon the very large portion of this increase
which was unearned, and, as it were, accidental. For the expectations
thus raised, it appears to me that an amply sufficient allowance is
made, if the whole increase of income which has accrued during this long
period from a mere natural law, without exertion or sacrifice, is held
sacred from any peculiar taxation. From the present date, or any
subsequent time at which the legislature may think fit to assert the
principle, I see no objection to declaring that the future increment of
rent should be liable to special taxation; in doing which dalld
injustice to the landlords would be obviated, if the present
market-price of their land were secured to them; since that includes the
present value of all future expectations. With reference to such a tax,
perhaps a safer criterion than either a rise of rents or a rise of the
price of corn, would be a general rise in the price of land. It would be
easy to keep the tax within the amount which would reduce the market
value of land below the original valuation: and up to that point,
whatever the amount of the tax might be, no injustice would be done to
the proprietors.

§ 6. [A land tax, in some cases, is not taxation, but a rent-charge in
favour of the public] But whatever may be thought of the legitimacy of
making the State a sharer in all future increase of rent from natural
causes, the existing land-tax (which in this country unfortunately is
very small) ought not to be regarded as a tax, but as a rent-charge in
favour of the public; a portion of the rent, reserved from athe
beginninga by the State, which has never belonged to or formed part of
the income of the landlords, and should not therefore be counted to them
as part of their taxation, so as to exempt them from their fair share of
every other tax. As well might the tithe be regarded as a tax on the
landlords: as well, in Bengal, where the State, bthoughb entitled to the
whole rent of the land, gave away one-tenth of it to individuals,
retaining the other nine-tenths, might those nine-tenths be considered
as an unequal and unjust tax on the grantees of the tenth. That a person
owns part of the rent, does not make the rest of it his just right,
injuriously withheld from him. The landlords originally held their
estates subject to feudal burthens, for which the present land-tax is an
exceedingly small equivalent, and for their relief from which they
should have been required to pay a much higher price. All who have
bought land Edition: current; Page: [822] since the tax existed have
bought it subject to the tax. There is not the smallest pretence for
looking upon it as a payment exacted from the existing race of
landlords.

These observations are applicable to a land-tax, only in so far as it is
a peculiar tax, and not when it is merely a mode of levying from the
landlords the equivalent of what is taken from other classes. In France,
for example, there are peculiar taxes on other kinds of property and
income (the mobilier and the patente), and supposing the land-tax to be
not more than equivalent to these, there would be no ground for
contending that the state had reserved to itself a rent-charge on the
land. But wherever and in so far as income derived from land is
prescriptively subject to a deduction for public purposes, beyond the
rate of taxation levied on other incomes, the surplus is not properly
taxation, but a share of the property in the soil, reserved by the
state. In this country there are no peculiar taxes on other classes,
corresponding to, or intended to countervail, the land-tax. The whole of
it, therefore, is not taxation, but a rent-charge, and is as if the
state had retained, not a portion of the rent, but a portion of the
land. It is no more a burthen on the landlord, than the share of one
joint tenant is a burthen on the other. The landlords are entitled to no
compensation for it, nor have they any claim to its being allowed for,
as part of their taxes. Its continuance on the existing footing is no
infringement of the principle of Equal Taxation.*

We shall hereafter consider, in treating of Indirect Taxation, how far,
and with what modifications, the rule of equality is applicable to that
department.

§ 7. [Taxes falling on capital are not necessarily objectionable] In
addition to the preceding rules, another general rule of taxation is
sometimes laid down, namely, that it should fall on income, and not on
capital. That taxation should not encroach upon the amount of the
national capital, is indeed of the greatest importance; but this
encroachment, when it occurs, is not so much a consequence of any
particular mode of taxation, as of its excessive amount. Over-taxation,
carried to a sufficient extent, is quite capable of ruining the most
industrious community, especially when it is in any degree arbitrary, so
that the payer is never certain how much or how little he shall be
allowed to keep; or when it is so laid on as to render Edition: current;
Page: [823] industry and economy a bad calculation. But if these errors
be avoided, and the amount of taxation be not greater than it is at
present even in the most heavily taxed country of Europe, there is no
danger lest it should deprive the country of a portion of its capital.

To provide that taxation shall fall entirely on income, and not at all
on capital, is beyond the power of any system of fiscal arrangements.
There is no tax which is not partly paid from what would otherwise have
been saved; no tax, the amount of which, if remitted, would be wholly
employed in increased expenditure, and no part whatever laid by as an
addition to capital. All taxes, therefore, are in some sense partly paid
out of capital; and in a poor country it is impossible to impose any tax
which will not impede the increase of the national wealth. But in a
country where capital abounds, and the spirit of accumulation is strong,
this effect of taxation is scarcely felt. Capital having reached the
stage in which, were it not for a perpetual succession of improvements
in production, any further increase would soon be stopped—and having so
strong a tendency even to outrun those improvements, that profits are
only kept above the minimum by emigration of capital, or by a periodical
sweep called a commercial crisis; to take from capital by taxation what
emigration would remove, or a commercial crisis destroy, is only to do
what either of those causes would have done, namely, to make a clear
space for further saving.

I cannot, therefore, attach any importance, in a wealthy country, to the
objection made against taxes on legacies and inheritances, that they are
taxes on capital. It is perfectly true that they are so. As Ricardo
observes, if 100l. are taken from any one in a tax on houses or on wine,
he will probably save it, or a part of it, by living in a cheaper house,
consuming less wine, or retrenching from some other of his expenses; but
if the same sum be taken from him because he has received a legacy of
1000l., he considers the legacy as only 900l., and feels no more
inducement than at any other time (probably feels rather less
inducement) to economize in his expenditure. The tax, therefore, is
wholly paid out of capital: and there are countries in which this would
be a serious objection. But in the first place, the argument cannot
apply to any country which has a national debt, and devotes any portion
of revenue to paying it off; since the produce of the tax, thus applied,
still remains capital, and is merely transferred from the tax-payer to
the fundholder. But the objection is never applicable in a country which
increases rapidly in wealth. The amount which would be derived, even
from a very high legacy duty, in each year, is but a small fraction of
the annual increase of capital in such a country; and its abstraction
would but make room for saving to an equivalent amount: while the effect
of not taking it, is to prevent that amount of saving, or cause the
savings, when made, to be sent abroad for investment. A country which,
Edition: current; Page: [824] like England, accumulates capital not only
for itself, but for half the world, may be said to defray the whole of
its public expenses from its overflowings; and its wealth is probably at
this moment as great as if it had no taxes at all. What its taxes really
do is, to substract from its means, not of production, but of enjoyment;
since whatever any one pays in taxes, he could, if it were not taken for
that purpose, employ in indulging his ease, or in gratifying some want
or taste which at present remains unsatisfied.

Edition: current; Page: [825]


CHAPTER III: Of Direct Taxes

§ 1. [Direct taxes either on income or on expenditure] Taxes are either
direct or indirect. A direct tax is one which is demanded from the very
persons who, it is intended or desired, should pay it. Indirect taxes
are those which are demanded from one person in the expectation and
intention that he shall indemnify himself at the expense of another:
such as the excise or customs. The producer or importer of a commodity
is called upon to pay a tax on it, not with the intention to levy a
peculiar contribution upon him, but to tax through him the consumers of
the commodity, from whom it is supposed that he will recover the amount
by means of an advance in price.

Direct taxes are either on income, or on expenditure. Most taxes on
expenditure are indirect, but some are direct, being imposed not on the
producer or seller of an article, but immediately on the consumer. A
house-tax, for example, is a direct tax on expenditure, if levied, as it
usually is, on the occupier of the house. If levied on the builder or
owner, it would be an indirect tax. aAa window-tax is a direct tax on
expenditure; so are the taxes on horses and carriages, and the rest of
what are called the assessed taxes.

The sources of income are rent, profits, and wages. This includes every
bsortb of income, except gift or plunder. Taxes may be laid on any one
of the three kinds of income, or an uniform tax on all of them. We will
consider these in their order.

§ 2. [Taxes on rent] A tax on rent falls wholly on the landlord. There
are no means by which he can shift the burthen upon any one else. It
does not affect the value or price of agricultural produce, for this is
determined by the cost of production in the most unfavourable
circumstances, and in those circumstances, as we have so often
demonstrated, no rent is paid. A tax on rent, therefore, has no effect,
other than its obvious one. It merely takes so much from the landlord,
and transfers it to the state.

This, however, is, in strict exactness, only true of the rent which is
the result either of natural causes, or of improvements made by tenants.
When Edition: current; Page: [826] the landlord makes improvements which
increase the productive power of his land, he is remunerated for them by
an extra payment from the tenant; and this payment, which to the
landlord is properly a profit on capital, is blended and confounded with
rent; which indeed it really is, to the tenant, and in respect of the
economical laws which determine its amount. A tax on rent, if extending
to this portion of it, would discourage landlords from making
improvements: but it does not follow that it would raise the price of
agricultural produce. The same improvements might be made with the
tenant’s capital, or even with the landlord’s if lent by him to the
tenant; provided he is willing to give the tenant so long a lease as
will enable him to indemnify himself before it expires. But whatever
hinders improvements from being made in the manner in which people
prefer to make them, will often prevent them from being made at all: and
on this account a tax on rent would be inexpedient, unless some means
could be devised of excluding from its operation that portion of the
nominal rent which may be regarded as landlord’s profit. This argument,
however, is not needed for the condemnation of such a tax. A peculiar
tax on the income of any class, not balanced by taxes on other classes,
is a violation of justice, and amounts to a partial confiscation. I have
already shown grounds for excepting from this censure a tax which,
sparing existing rents, should content itself with appropriating a
portion of any future increase arising from the mere action of natural
causes. But even this could not be justly done, without offering as an
alternative the market price of the land. In the case of a tax on rent
which is not peculiar, but accompanied by an equivalent tax on other
incomes, the objection grounded on its reaching the profit arising from
improvements ais less applicablea: since, profits being taxed as well as
rent, the profit which assumes the form of rent bis liable to its share
in common with other profits; but since profits altogether ought, for
reasons formerly stated, to be taxed somewhat lower than rent properly
so called, the objection is only diminished, not removedb.

§ 3. [Taxes on profits] A tax on profits, like a tax on rent, must, at
least in its immediate operation, fall wholly on the payer. All profits
being alike affected, no relief can be obtained by a change of
employment. If a tax were laid on the profits of any one branch of
productive employment, the tax would be virtually an increase of the
cost of production, and the value and price of the article would rise
accordingly; by which the tax would be thrown upon the consumers of the
commodity, and would not affect profits. But a general and equal tax on
all profits would not affect general prices, and would fall, at least in
the first instance, on capitalists alone.

Edition: current; Page: [827]
There is, however, an ulterior effect, which, in a rich and prosperous
country, requires to be taken into account. When the capital accumulated
is so great and the rate of annual accumulation so rapid, that the
country is only kept from attaining the stationary state by the
emigration of capital, or by continual improvements in production; any
circumstance which virtually lowers the rate of profit cannot be without
a decided influence on these phenomena. It may operate in different
ways. The curtailment of profit, and the consequent increased difficulty
aina making a fortune or obtaining a subsistence by the employment of
capital, may act as a stimulus to inventions, and to the use of them
when made. If improvements in production are much accelerated, and if
these improvements cheapen, directly or indirectly, any of the things
habitually consumed by the labourer, profits may rise, and rise
sufficiently to make up for all that is taken from them by the tax. In
that case the tax will have been realized without loss to any one, the
produce of the country being increased by an equal, or what would in
that case be a far greater amount. The tax, however, must even in this
case be considered as paid from profits, because the receivers of
profits are those who would be benefited if it were taken off.

But though the artificial abstraction of a portion of profits would have
a real tendency to accelerate improvements in production, no
considerable improvements might actually result, or only of such a kind
as not to raise general profits at all, or not to raise them so much as
the tax had diminished them. If so, the rate of profit would be brought
closer to that practical minimum, to which it is constantly approaching:
and this diminished return to capital would either give a decided check
to further accumulation, or would cause a greater proportion than before
of the annual increase to be sent abroad, or wasted in unprofitable
speculations. At its first imposition the tax falls wholly on profits:
but the amount of increase of capital, which the tax prevents, would, if
it had been allowed to continue, have tended to reduce profits to the
same level; and at every period of ten or twenty years there will be
found less difference between profits as they are, and profits as they
would in that case have been: until at last there is no difference, and
the tax is thrown either upon the labourer or upon the landlord. The
real effect of a tax on profits is to make the country possess at any
given period, a smaller capital and a smaller aggregate production, and
to make the stationary state be attained earlier, and with a smaller sum
of national wealth. It is possible that a tax on profits might even
diminish the existing capital of the country. If the rate of profit is
already at the practical minimum, that is, at the point at which all
that portion of the annual increment which would tend to reduce profits
is carried off either by exportation or by bspeculationb; then if a tax
is imposed which Edition: current; Page: [828] reduces profits still
lower, the same causes which previously carried off the increase would
probably carry off a portion of the existing capital. A tax on profits
is thus, in a state of capital and accumulation like that in England,
extremely detrimental to the national wealth. And this effect is not
confined to the case of a peculiar, and therefore intrinsically unjust,
tax on profits. The mere fact that profits have to bear their share of a
heavy general taxation, tends, in the same manner as a peculiar tax, to
drive capital abroad, to stimulate imprudent speculations by diminishing
safe gains, to discourage further accumulation, and to accelerate the
attainment of the stationary state. This is thought to have been the
principal cause of the decline of Holland, or rather of her having
ceased to make progress.

Even in countries which do not accumulate so fast as to be always within
a short interval of the stationary state, it seems impossible that, if
capital is accumulating at all, its accumulation should not be in some
degree retarded by the abstraction of a portion of its profit; and
unless the effect in stimulating improvements be a full counter-balance,
it is inevitable that a part of the burthen will be thrown off the
capitalist, upon the labourer or the landlord. One or other of these is
always the loser by a diminished rate of accumulation. If population
continues to increase as before, the labourer suffers: if not,
cultivation is checked in its advance, and the landlords lose the
accession of rent which would have accrued to them. The only ccountriesc
in which a tax on profits seems likely to be permanently a burthen on
capitalists exclusively, are those in which capital is stationary,
because there is no new accumulation. In such countries the tax might
not prevent the old capital from being kept up through habit, or from
unwillingness to submit to impoverishment, and so the capitalist might
continue to bear the whole of the tax. It is seen from these
considerations that the effects of a tax on profits are much more
complex, more various, and in some points more uncertain, than writers
on the subject have commonly supposed.

§ 4. [Taxes on wages] We anow turna to Taxes on Wages. The incidence of
these is very different, according as the wages taxed are those of
ordinary unskilled labour, or are the remuneration of such skilled or
privileged employments, whether manual or intellectual, as are taken out
of the sphere of competition by a natural or bconferred monopoly.

I have already remarked, that in the present low state of popular
education, all the higher grades of mental or educated labour are at a
monopoly price; exceeding the wages of common workmen in a degree very
far beyond that which is due to the expense, trouble, and loss of time
required in qualifying for the employment. Any tax levied on these
gains, Edition: current; Page: [829] which still leaves them above (or
not below) their just proportion, falls on those who pay it; they have
no means of relieving themselves at the expense of any other class. The
same thing is true of ordinary wages, in cases like that of the United
States, or of a new colony, where, capital increasing as rapidly as
population can increase, wages are kept up by the increase of capital,
and not by the adherence of the labourers to a fixed standard of
comforts. In such a case some deterioration of their condition, whether
by a tax or otherwise, might possibly take place without checking the
increase of population. The tax would in that case fall on the labourers
themselves, and would reduce them prematurely to that lower state to
which, on the same supposition with regard to their habits, they would
in any case have been reduced ultimately, by the inevitable diminution
in the rate of increase of capital, through the occupation of all the
fertile land.

Some will object that, even in this case, a tax on wages cannot be
detrimental to the labourers, since the money raised by it, being
expended in the country, comes back to the labourers again through the
demand for labour. The fallacy, however, of this doctrine has been so
completely exhibited in the First Book,* that I need do little more than
refer to that exposition. It was there shown that funds expended
unproductively have no tendency to raise or keep up wages, unless when
expended in the direct purchase of labour. If the government took a tax
of a shilling a week from every labourer, and laid it all out in hiring
labourers for military service, public works, or the like, it would, no
doubt, indemnify the labourers as a class for all that the tax took from
them. That would really be “spending the money among the people.” But if
it expended the whole in buying goods, or in adding to the salaries of
employés who bought goods with it, this would not increase the demand
for labour, or tend to raise wages. Withoutc, however,c reverting to
dgeneral principlesd, we may rely on an obvious reductio ad absurdum. If
to take money from the labourers and spend it in commodities is giving
it back to the labourers, then, to take money from other classes, and
spend it in the same manner, must be giving it to the labourers;
consequently, the more a government takes in taxes, the greater will be
the demand for labour, and the more opulent the condition of the
labourers. A proposition the absurdity of which no one can fail to see.

In the condition of most communities, wages are regulated by the
habitual standard of living to which the labourers adhere, and on less
than which they will not multiply. Where there exists such a standard, a
tax on wages will indeed for a time be borne by the labourers
themselves; but unless this temporary depression has the effect of
lowering the standard Edition: current; Page: [830] itself, the increase
of population will receive a check, which will raise wages, and restore
the labourers to their previous condition. On whom, in this case, will
the tax fall? According to Adam Smith, on the community generally, in
their character of consumers; since the rise of wages, he thought, would
raise general prices. We have seen, however, that general prices depend
on other causes, and are never raised by any circumstance which affects
all kinds of productive employment in the same manner and degree. A rise
of wages occasioned by a tax, must, like any other increase of the cost
of labour, be defrayed from profits. To attempt to tax day-labourers, in
an old country, is merely to impose an extra tax upon all employers of
common labour; unless the tax has the much worse effect of permanently
lowering the standard of comfortable subsistence in the minds of the
poorest class.

We find in the preceding considerations an additional argument for the
opinion already expressed, that direct taxations should stop short of
the class of incomes which do not exceed what is necessary for healthful
existence. eThesee very small incomes are fmostlyf derived from manual
labour; and, as we now see, any tax imposed on these, either permanently
degrades the habits of the labouring class, or falls on profits, and
burthens capitalists with an indirect tax, in addition to their share of
the direct taxes; which is doubly objectionable, both as a violation of
the fundamental rule of equality, and for the reasons which, as already
shown, render a peculiar tax on profits detrimental to the public
wealth, and consequently to the means which society possesses of paying
any taxes whatever.

§ 5. [An Income Tax] We now pass, from taxes on the separate kinds of
income, to a tax attempted to be assessed fairly upon all kinds; in
other words, an Income Tax. The discussion of the conditions necessary
for making this tax consistent with justice, has been anticipated in the
last chapter. We shall suppose, therefore, that athesea conditions are
complied with. They are, first, that incomes below a certain amount
should be altogether untaxed. This minimum should not be higher than the
amount which suffices for the necessaries of bthe existing populationb.
The exemption from the present income tax, of all incomes under c100l.c
a year, dand the lower percentage eformerlye levied on those between
100l. and 150l., ared only defensible on the ground that falmost all the
indirect taxesf press Edition: current; Page: [831] more heavily on
incomes between 50l. and 150l. than on any others whatever. The second
condition is, that incomes above the limit should be taxed only in
proportion to the surplus by which they exceed the limit. Thirdly, that
gall sums saved from income and invested, should be exempt from the tax:
or if this be found impracticable, that life incomes, and incomes from
business and professions,g should be less heavily taxed than inheritable
incomes, in a degree as nearly as possible equivalent to the increased
need of economy arising from their terminable characterh: allowance
being also made, in the case of variable incomes, for their
precariousness.h

An income-tax, fairly assessed on these principles, would be, in point
of justice, the least exceptionable of all taxes. The objection to it,
iin the present low state of public moralityi, is the impossibility of
ascertaining the real incomes of the contributors. The supposed hardship
of compelling people to disclose the amount of their incomes, ought not,
in my opinion, to count for much. One of the social evils of this
country is the practice, amounting to a custom, of maintaining, or
attempting to maintain, the appearance to the world of a larger income
than is possessed; and it would be far better for the jinterestj of
those who yield to this weakness, if the extent of their means were
universally and exactly known, and the temptation removed to expending
more than they can afford, or stinting real wants in order to make a
false show externally. At the same time, the reason of the case, even on
this point, is not so exclusively on one side of the argument as is
sometimes supposed. So long as the vulgar of any country are in the
debased state of mind which this national habit presupposes—so long as
their respect (if such a word can be applied to it) is proportioned to
what they suppose to be each person’s pecuniary means—it may be doubted
whether anything which would remove all kuncertaintyk as to that point,
would not considerably increase the presumption and arrogance of the
vulgar rich, and their insolence towards those above them in mind and
character, but below them in lfortunel.

Notwithstanding, too, what is called the inquisitorial nature of the
tax, no amount of inquisitorial power which would be tolerated by a
people the most disposed to submit to it, could enable the revenue
officers to assess the tax from actual knowledge of the circumstances of
contributors. Rents, salaries, annuities, and all fixed incomes, can be
exactly ascertained. But Edition: current; Page: [832] the variable
gains of professions, and still more the profits of business, which the
person interested cannot always himself exactly ascertain, can still
less be estimated with any approach to fairness by a tax-collector. The
main reliance must be placed, and always has been placed, on the returns
made by the person himself. No production of accounts is of much avail,
except against the more flagrant cases of falsehood; and even against
these the check is very imperfect, for if fraud is intended, false
accounts can generally be framed which it will baffle any means of
inquiry possessed by the revenue officers to detect: the easy resource
of omitting entries on the credit side being often sufficient without
the aid of fictitious debts or disbursements. The tax, therefore, on
whatever principles of equality it may be imposed, is in practice
unequal in one of the worst ways, falling heaviest on the most
conscientious. The unscrupulous succeed in evading a great proportion of
what they should pay; even persons of integrity in their ordinary
transactions are tempted to palter with their consciences, at least to
the extent of deciding in their own favour all points on which the
smallest doubt or discussion could arise: while the strictly veracious
mmay bem made to pay more than the state intended, by the powers of
arbitrary assessment necessarily intrusted to the Commissioners, as the
last defence against the tax-payer’s power of concealment.

It is to be feared, therefore, that the fairness which belongs to the
principle of an income tax, ncannotn be made to attach to it in
practice: and that this tax, while apparently the most just of all modes
of raising a revenue, is in effect more unjust than many others which
are primâ facie more objectionable. This consideration would lead us to
concur in the opinion which, until of late, has usually prevailed—that
direct taxes on income should be reserved as an extraordinary resource
for great national emergencies, in which the necessity of a large
additional revenue overrules all oobjections.

The difficulties of a fair income tax have pelicited a proposition for a
direct tax of so much per cent, not on income but on expenditure; the
aggregate amount of each person’s expenditure being ascertained, as the
amount of income now is, from statements furnished by the contributors
themselves. The author of this suggestion, Mr. Revans, in a clever
pamphlet on the subject,* contends that the returns which persons would
furnish of their expenditure would be more trustworthy than those which
they now make of their income, inasmuch as expenditure is in its own
nature more public than income, and false representations of it more
easily Edition: current; Page: [833] detected. He cannot, I think, have
sufficiently considered, how few of the items in the annual expenditure
of most families can be judged of with any approximation to correctness
from the external signs. The only security would still be the veracity
of individuals, and there is no reason for supposing that their
statements would be more trustworthy on the subject of their expenses
than qthat of their revenues; especially as, the expenditure of most
persons being composed of many more items than their income, there would
be more scope for concealment and suppression in the detail of expenses
than even of receipts.

The taxes on expenditure at present in force, either in this or in other
countries, fall only on particular kinds of expenditure, and differ no
otherwise from taxes on commodities than in being paid directly by the
person who consumes or uses the article, instead of being advanced by
the producer or seller, and reimbursed in the price. The taxes on horses
and carriages, on dogs, on servants, are rallr of this nature. They
evidently fall on the persons from whom they are levied—those who use
the commodity taxed. A tax of a similar description, and more important,
is a house-tax; which must be considered at somewhat greater length.

§ 6. [A House Tax] The rent of a house consists of two parts, the
ground-rent, and what Adam Smith calls the building-rent. The first is
determined by the ordinary principles of rent. It is the remuneration
given for the use of the portion of land occupied by the house and its
appurtenances; and varies from a mere equivalent for the rent which the
ground would afford in agriculture, to the monopoly rents paid for
advantageous situations in populous thoroughfares. The rent of the house
itself, as distinguished from the ground, is the equivalent given for
the labour and capital expended on the building. The fact of its being
received in quarterly or half-yearly payments, makes no difference in
the principles by which it is regulated. It comprises the ordinary
profit on the builder’s capital, and an annuity, sufficient at the
current rate of interest, after paying for all repairs chargeable on the
proprietor, to replace the original capital by the time the house is
worn out, or by the expiration of the usual term of a building lease.

A tax of so much per cent on the gross rent, falls on both athosea
portions alike. The more highly a house is rented, the more it pays to
the tax, whether the quality of the situation or that of the house
itself is the cause. The incidence, however, of these two portions of
the tax must be considered separately.

As much of it as is a tax on building-rent, must ultimately fall on the
consumer, in other words the occupier. For as the profits of building
are Edition: current; Page: [834] already not above the ordinary rate,
they would, if the tax fell on the owner and not on the occupier, become
lower than the profits of untaxed employments, and houses would not be
built. It is probable however that for some time after the tax was first
imposed, a great part of it would fall, not on the renter, but on the
owner of the house. A large proportion of the consumers either could not
afford, or would not choose, to pay their former rent with the tax in
addition, but would content themselves with a lower scale of
accommodation. Houses therefore would be for a time in excess of the
demand. The consequence of such excess, in the case of most other
articles, would be an almost immediate diminution of the supply: but so
durable a commodity as houses does not rapidly diminish in amount. New
buildings indeedb, of the class for which the demand had decreased,b
would cease to be erected, except for special reasons; but in the
meantime the temporary superfluity would lower rents, and the consumers
would obtain perhaps nearly the same accommodation as formerly, for the
same aggregate payment, rent and tax together. By degrees, however, as
the existing houses wore out, or as increase of population demanded a
greater supply, rents would again rise; until it became profitable to
recommence building, which would not be until the tax was wholly
ctransferred toc the occupier. In the end, therefore, the occupier bears
that portion of a tax on rent, which falls on the payment made for the
house itself, exclusively of the ground it stands on.

dThe case is partlyd different with the portion which is a tax on
ground-rent. As taxes on rent, properly so called, fall on the landlord,
a tax on ground-rent, one would suppose, must fall on the
ground-landlord, at least after the expiration of the building lease.
eIt will not however fall wholly on the landlord, unless with the tax on
ground-rent there ise combined an equivalent tax on agricultural rentf.
The glowestg rent of land let for building is very little above the rent
which the same ground would yield in agriculture: since it is reasonable
to suppose that land, unless in case of exceptional circumstances, is
let or sold for building as soon as it is decidedly worth more for that
purpose than for hcultivationh. If, therefore, a tax were laid on
ground-rents without being also laid on agricultural rents, it would,
unless of itrifling amount, reduce the return from the lowest
ground-rents below the ordinary return from land, and would jcheckj
further building quite as effectually as if it were a tax on
building-rents, until either the increased demand of a growing
population, or a diminution Edition: current; Page: [835] of supply by
kthe ordinary causes of destructionk, had raised the rent by a full
equivalent for the tax. But whatever raises the lowest ground-rents,
raises all others, since each exceeds the lowest by lthe market value of
its peculiar advantages. mIf, therefore, the tax on ground-rents were a
fixed sum per square foot, the more valuable situations paying no more
than those least in request, this fixed payment would ultimately fall on
the occupier. Suppose the lowest ground-rent to be 10l. per acre, and
the highest 1000l., a tax of 1l. per acre on ground-rents would
ultimately raise the former to 11l., and the latter consequently to
1001l., since the difference of value between the two situations would
be exactly what it was before: the annual pound, therefore, would be
paid by the occupier. But a tax on ground-rent is supposed to be a
portion of a house-tax, which is not a fixed payment, but a percentage
on the rent. The cheapest site, therefore, being supposed as before to
pay 1l., the dearest would pay 100l., of which only the 1l. could be
thrown upon the occupier, since the rent would still be only raised to
1001l. Consequently, 99l. of the 100l. levied from the expensive site,
would fall on the ground-landlord. A house-tax thus requires to be
considered in a double aspect, as a tax on all occupiers of houses, and
a tax on ground-rents.

In the vast majority of houses, the ground-rent forms but a small
proportion of the annual payment made for the house, and nearly all the
tax falls on the occupier. It is only in exceptional cases, like that of
the favourite situations in large towns, that the predominant element in
the rent of the house is the ground-rent; and among the very few kinds
of income which are fit subjects for peculiar taxation, these
ground-rents hold the principal place, being the most gigantic example
extant of enormous accessions of riches acquired rapidly, and in many
cases unexpectedly, by a few families, from the mere accident of their
possessing certain tracts of land, without their having themselves aided
in the acquisition by the smallest exertion, outlay, or risk. So far
therefore as a house-tax falls on the ground-landlord, it is liable to
no valid objection.

In so far as it falls on the occupierm, if justly proportioned to the
value of the house, nitn is one of the fairest and most unobjectionable
of all taxes. No part of a person’s expenditure is a better criterion of
his means, or bears, on the whole, more nearly the same proportion to
them. A house-tax Edition: current; Page: [836] is a nearer approach to
a fair income tax, than a direct assessment on income can easily be;
having the great advantage, that it makes spontaneously all the
allowances which it is so difficult to make, and so impracticable to
make exactly, in assessing an income tax: for if what a person pays in
house-rent is a test of anything, it is a test not of what he possesses,
but of what he thinks he can afford to spend. oThe equality of this tax
can only be seriously questioned on two grounds.o The first is, that a
miser may escape it. This objection applies to all taxes on expenditure:
nothing but a direct tax on income can reach a miser. But pas misersp do
not now hoard their treasure, but invest it in qproductive employments,
it not onlyq adds to the national wealth, and consequently to the
general means of paying taxes, rbut the payment claimable from itself is
only transferred from the principal sum to the income afterwards derived
from it, which pays taxes as soon as it comes to be expendedr. The
second objection is, that a person may require a larger and more
expensive house, not from having greater means, but from having a larger
family. Of this, however, he is not entitled to complain; since having a
large family is at a person’s own choice: and, so far as concerns the
public interest, is a thing rather to be discouraged than promoted.*

Edition: current; Page: [837]
sA larges portion of the taxation of tthist country is uraised by a
house-taxv. Thev parochial taxation of the towns entirely, and of the
rural districts partially, wconsistsw of an assessment on house-rent.
The window-tax, which xwasx also a house-tax, but of a bad kind,
operating as a tax on light, and a cause of deformity in buildingy, was
exchanged in 1851 for a house-tax properly so called, but on a much
lower scale than that which existed previously to 1834. It is to be
lamented that the new tax retainsy the unjust principle on which the old
house-tax was assessed, and which contributed quite as much as the
selfishness of the middle classes to produce the outcry against the
taxz. The public were justly scandalized on learning that residences
like Chatsworth or Belvoir were only rated on an imaginary rent of
perhaps 200l. a year, under the pretext that owing to the great expense
of keeping them up, they could not be let for more. Probably, indeed,
they could not be let even for that, and if the argument were a fair
one, they ought not to have been taxed at all. But a house-tax is not
intended as a tax on incomes derived from houses, but on expenditure
incurred for them. The thing which it is wished to ascertain is what a
house costs to the person who lives in it, not what it would bring in if
let to some one else. When the occupier is not the owner, aand does not
hold on a repairing lease,a the rent he pays is the measure of what bthe
houseb costs him: cbutc when he is the owner, some other measure must be
sought. A valuation should be made of the house, not at what it would
sell for, but at what would be the cost of rebuilding it, and this
valuation might be dperiodically correctedd by an allowance for what it
had lost in value by time, or gained by repairs and improvements. The
amount of the amended valuation would form a principal sum, the interest
of which, at the current price of the public funds, would form the
annual value at which the building should be assessed to the tax.

As incomes below a certain amount ought to be exempt from income tax, so
ought houses below a certain value, from house-tax, on the universal
principle of sparing from all taxation the absolute necessaries of
healthful existence. In order that the occupiers of lodgings, as well as
of houses, might benefit, as in justice they ought, by this exemption,
it might be optional with the owners to have every portion of a house
which is occupied by a separate tenant, valued and assessed separately,
as is now usually the case with chambers.

Edition: current; Page: [838]


CHAPTER IV: Of Taxes on Commodities

§ 1. [A Tax on all Commodities would fall on profits] By taxes on
commodities are commonly meant, those which are levied either on the
producers, or on the carriers or dealers who intervene between them and
the final purchasers for consumption. Taxes imposed directly on the
consumers of particular commodities, such as a house-tax, or the tax in
this country on horses and carriages, might be called taxes on
commodities, but are not; the phrase being by custom, confined to
indirect taxes—those which are advanced by one person, to be, as is
expected and intended, reimbursed by another. Taxes on commodities are
either on production within the country, or on importation into it, or
on conveyance or sale within it; and are classed respectively as excise,
customs, or tolls and transit duties. To whichever class they belong,
and at whatever stage in the progress of the acommunitya they may be
imposed, they are equivalent to an increase of the cost of production;
using that term in its most enlarged sense, which includes the cost of
transport and distribution, or, in common phrase, of bringing the
commodity to market.

When the cost of production is increased artificially by a tax, the
effect is the same as when it is increased by natural causes. If only
one or a few commodities are affected, their value and price rise, so as
to compensate the producer or dealer for the peculiar burthen; but if
there were a tax on all commodities, exactly proportioned to their
value, no such compensation would be obtained: there would neither be a
general rise of values, which is an absurdity, nor of prices, which
depend on causes entirely different. There would, however, as Mr.
M‘Culloch has pointed out, be a disturbance of values, some falling,
others rising, owing to a circumstance, the effect of which on values
and prices we formerly discussed; the different durability of the
capital employed in different occupations. The gross produce of industry
consists of two parts; one portion serving to replace the capital
consumed, while the other portion is profit. Now equal capitals in two
branches of production must have equal expectations of profit; but if a
greater portion of the one than of the other is fixed capital, or if
that fixed Edition: current; Page: [839] capital is more durable, there
will be a less consumption of capital in the year, and less will be
required to replace it, so that the profit, bif absolutely the same,
willb form a greater proportion of the annual returns. To derive from a
capital of 1000l. a profit of 100l., the one producer may have to sell
produce to the value of 1100l., the other only to the value of 500l. If
on these two branches of industry a tax be imposed of five per cent ad
valorem, the last will be charged only with 25l., the first with 55l.;
leaving to the one 75l. profit, to the other only 45l. To equalize,
therefore, their expectation of profit, the one commodity must rise in
price, or the other must fall, or both: commodities made chiefly by
immediate labour must rise in value, as compared with those which are
chiefly made by machinery. It is unnecessary to prosecute this branch of
the inquiry any further.

§ 2. [Taxes on particular commodities fall on the consumer] A tax on any
one commodity, whether laid on its production, its importation, its
carriage from place to place, or its sale, and whether the tax be a
fixed sum of money for a given quantity of the commodity, or an ad
valorem duty, will, as a general rule, raise the value and price of the
commodity by at least the amount of the tax. There are few cases in
which it does not raise them by more than that amount. In the first
place, there are few taxes on production on account of which it is not
found or deemed necessary to impose restrictive regulations on the
manufacturers or dealers, in order to check evasions of the tax. These
regulations are always sources of trouble and annoyance, and generally
of expense, for all of which, being peculiar disadvantages, the
producers or dealers must have compensation in the price of their
commodity. These restrictions also frequently interfere with the
processes of manufacture, requiring the producer to carry on his
operations in the way most convenient to the revenue, though not the
cheapest, or most efficient for purposes of production. Any regulations
whatever, enforced by law, make it difficult for the producer to adopt
new and improved processes. Further, the necessity of advancing the tax
obliges producers and dealers to carry on their business with larger
capitals than would otherwise be necessary, on the whole of which they
must receive the ordinary rate of profit, though a part only is employed
in defraying the real expenses of production or importation. The price
of the article must be such as to afford a profit on more than its
natural value, instead of a profit on only its natural value. A part of
the capital of the country, in short, is not employed in production, but
in advances to the state, repaid in the price of goods; and the
consumers must give an indemnity to the sellers, equal to the profit
which they could have made on the same capital if really Edition:
current; Page: [840] employed in production.* Neither ought it to be
forgotten, that whatever renders a larger capital necessary in any trade
or business, limits the competition in that business; and by giving
something like a monopoly to a few dealers, amay enablea them either to
keep up the price beyond what would afford the ordinary rate of profit,
or to obtain the ordinary rate of profit with a less degree of exertion
for improving and cheapening their commodity. In these several modes,
taxes on commodities often cost to the consumer, through the increased
price of the article, much more than they bring into the treasury of the
state. There is still another consideration. bThe higher price
necessitatedb by the tax, almost always checks the demand for the
commodity; and since there are many improvements in production which, to
make them practicable, require a certain extent of demand, such
improvements are obstructed, and many of them prevented altogether. It
is a well-known fact, that the branches of production in which fewest
improvements are made, are those with which the revenue officer
interferes; and that nothing, in general, gives a greater impulse to
improvements in the production of a commodity, than taking off a tax
which narrowed the market for it.

§ 3. [Peculiar effects of taxes on necessaries] Such are the effects of
taxes on commodities, considered generally; but as there are some
commodities (those composing the necessaries of the labourer) of which
the values have an influence on the distribution of wealth among
different classes of the community, it is requisite to trace the effects
of taxes on those particular articles somewhat farther. If a tax be
laid, say on corn, and the price rises in proportion to the tax, the
rise of price may operate in two ways. First: it may lower the condition
of the labouring classes; temporarily indeed it can scarcely fail to do
so. If it diminishes their consumption of the produce of the earth, or
amakes them resorta to a food which the soil produces more abundantly,
and therefore more cheaply, it to that extent contributes to throw back
agriculture upon more fertile lands or less costly processes, and to
lower the value and price of corn; which therefore ultimately bsettlesb
at a price, increased not by the whole amount of the tax, but by only a
part of its amount. Secondly, however, it may happen that the Edition:
current; Page: [841] dearness of the taxed food does not lower the
habitual standard of the labourer’s requirements, but that wages, on the
contrary, through an action on population, rise, in a shorter or longer
period, so as to compensate the labourers for their portion of the tax;
the compensation being of course at the expense of profits. Taxes on
necessaries must thus have one of two effects. Either they lower the
condition of the labouring classes; or they exact from the owners of
capital, in addition to the amount due to the state on their own
necessaries, the amount due on those consumed by the labourers. In the
last case, the tax on necessaries, like a tax on wages, is equivalent to
a peculiar tax on profits; which is, like all other partial taxation,
unjust, and is specially prejudicial to the increase of the national
wealth.

It remains to speak of the effect on rent. Assuming (what is usually the
fact,) that the consumption of food is not diminished, the same
cultivation as before will be necessary to supply the wants of the
community; the margin of cultivation, to use Dr. Chalmers’ expression,
remains where it was; and the same land or capital which, as the least
productive, already regulated the value and price of the whole produce,
will continue to regulate them. The effect which a tax on agricultural
produce will have on rent, depends on its affecting or not affecting the
difference between the return to this least productive land or capital,
and the returns to other lands and capitals. Now this depends on the
manner in which the tax is imposed. If it is an ad valorem tax, or what
is the same thing, a fixed proportion of the produce, such as tithe for
example, it evidently lowers corn-rents. For it takes more corn from the
better lands than from the worse; and exactly in the degree in which
they are better; land of twice the cproductivenessc paying twice as much
to the tithe. Whatever takes more from the greater of two quantities
than from the less, diminishes the difference between them. The
imposition of a tithe on corn would take a tithe also from corn-rent:
for if dwed reduce a series of numbers by a tenth each, the differences
between them are reduced one-tenth.

For example, let there be five qualities of land, which severally yield,
on the same extent of ground, and with the same expenditure, 100, 90,
80, 70, and 60 bushels of wheat; the last of these being the lowest
quality which the demand for food renders it necessary to cultivate. The
rent of these lands will be as follows:—

The land producing 100 bushels will yield a rent of 100-60, or 40
bushels.

That producing 90 bushels will yield a rent of 90-60, or 30 bushels.

That producing 80 bushels will yield a rent of 80-60, or 20 bushels.

That producing 70 bushels will yield a rent of 70-60, or 10 bushels.

That producing 60 bushels will yield no rent.

Edition: current; Page: [842]
Now let a tithe be imposed, which takes from these five pieces of land
10, 9, 8, 7, and 6 bushels respectively, the fifth quality still being
the one which regulates the price, but returning to the farmer, after
payment of tithe, no more than 54 bushels:—

  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  The land producing }   100 bushels reduced to 90, will yield a rent of 90-54, or 36 bushels.
  That producing }       90 bushels reduced to 81, will yield a rent of 81-54, or 27 bushels.
  That producing }       80 bushels reduced to 72, will yield a rent of 72-54, or 18 bushels.
  That producing }       70 bushels reduced to 63, will yield a rent of 63-54, or 9 bushels,
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------

and that producing 60 bushels, reduced to 54, will yield, as before, no
rent. So that the rent of the first quality of land has lost four
bushels; of the second, three; of the third, two; and of the fourth,
one: that is, each has lost exactly one-tenth. A tax, therefore, of a
fixed proportion of the produce, lowers, in the same proportion,
corn-rent.

But it is only corn-rent that is lowered, and not rent estimated in
money, or in any other commodity. For, in the same proportion as
corn-rent is reduced in quantity, the corn composing it is raised in
value. Under the tithe, 54 bushels will be worth in the market what 60
were before; and nine-tenths will in all cases sell for as much as the
whole ten-tenths previously sold for. The landlords will therefore be
compensated in value and price for what they lose in quantity; and will
suffer only so far as they consume their rent in kind, or after
receiving it in money, expend it in agricultural produce: that is, they
only suffer as consumers of agricultural produce, and in common with all
ethee other consumers. Considered as landlords, they have the same
income as before; the tithe, therefore, falls on the consumer, and not
on the landlord.

The same effect would be produced on rent, if the tax, instead of being
a fixed proportion of the produce, were a fixed sum per quarter or per
bushel. A tax which takes a shilling for every bushel, takes more
shillings from one field than from another, just in proportion as it
produces more bushels; and operates exactly like tithe, except that
tithe is not only the same proportion on all lands, but is also the same
proportion at all times, while a fixed sum of money per bushel will
amount to a greater or faf less proportion, according as corn is cheap
or dear.

There are other modes of taxing agriculture, which would affect rent
differently. A tax proportioned to the rent would fall wholly on the
rent, and would not at all raise the price of corn, which is regulated
by the portion of the produce that pays no rent. A fixed tax of so much
per Edition: current; Page: [843] cultivated acre, without distinction
of value, would have effects directly the reverse. Taking no more from
the best qualities of land than from the worst, it would leave the
differences the same as before, and consequently the same corn-rents,
and the landlords would profit to the full extent of the rise of price.
To put the thing in another manner; the price must grise sufficientlyg
to enable the worst land to pay the tax; thus enabling all lands which
produce more than the worst, to pay not only the tax, but also an
increased rent to the landlords. These, however, are not so much taxes
on the produce of land, as taxes on the land itself. Taxes on the
produce, properly so called, whether fixed or ad valorem, do not affect
rent, but fall on the consumer: profits, however, generally bearing
either the whole or the greatest part of the portion which is levied on
the consumption of the labouring classes.

§ 4. [How the peculiar effects of taxes on necessaries are modified by
the tendency of profits to a minimum] The preceding is, I apprehend, a
correct statement of the manner in which taxes on agricultural produce
operate when first laid on. When, however, they are of old standing,
their effect may be different, as was first pointed out, I believe, by
Mr. Senior. It is, as we have seen, an almost infallible consequence of
any reduction of profits, to retard the rate of accumulation. Now the
effect of accumulation, when attended by its usual accompaniment, an
increase of population, is to increase the value and price of food, to
raise rent, and to lower profits: that is, to do precisely what is done
by a tax on agricultural produce, except that this does not raise rent.
The tax, therefore, merely anticipates the rise of price, and fall of
profits, which would have taken place ultimately through the mere
progress of accumulation; while it at the same time prevents, or at
least retards, that progress. If the rate of profit was such, previous
to the imposition of a tithe, that the effect of the tithe reduces it to
the practical minimum, the tithe will put a stop to all further
accumulation, or cause it to take place out of the country; and the only
effect which the tithe will then have had on the consumer, is to make
him pay earlier the price which he would have had to pay somewhat
later—part of which, indeed, in the gradual progress of wealth and
population, he would have almost immediately begun to pay. After a lapse
of time which would have admitted of a rise of one-tenth athrougha the
natural progress of wealth, the consumer will be paying no more than he
would have paid if the tithe had never existed; he will have ceased to
pay any portion of it, and the person who will really pay it is the
landlord, whom it deprives of the increase of rent which would by that
time have accrued to him. At every successive point in this interval of
time, less of the burthen will rest on the Edition: current; Page: [844]
consumer, and more of it on the landlord: and in the ultimate result,
the minimum of profits will be reached with a smaller capital and
population, and a lower rental, than if the course of things had not
been disturbed by the imposition of the tax. If, on the other hand, the
tithe or other tax on agricultural produce does not reduce profits to
the minimum, but to something above the minimum, accumulation will not
be stopped, but only slackened: and if population also increases, the
two-fold increase will continue to produce its effects—a rise of the
price of corn, and an increase of rent. These consequences, however,
will not take place with the same rapidity as if the higher rate of
profit had continued. At the end of twenty years the country will have a
smaller population and capital, than, but for the tax, it would by that
time have had; the landlords will have a smaller rent; and the price of
corn, having increased less rapidly than it would otherwise have done,
will bnot be so much asb a tenth higher than what, if there had been no
tax, it would by that time have cbecomec. A part of the tax, therefore,
will already have ceased to fall on the consumer, and devolved upon the
landlord; and the proportion will become greater and greater by lapse of
time.

Mr. Senior illustrates dthisd view of the subject by likening the
effects of tithes, or other taxes on agricultural produce to those of
natural sterility of soil. If the land of a country ewithout access to
foreign supplies,e were suddenly smitten with a permanent deterioration
of quality, to an extent which would make a tenth more labour necessary
to raise the existing produce, the price of corn would undoubtedly rise
one-tenth. But it cannot hence be inferred that if the soil of the
country had from the beginning been one-tenth worse than it is, corn
would at present have been one-tenth dearer than we find it. It is far
more probable, that the smaller return to labour and capital, ever since
the first settlement of the country, would have caused in each
successive generation a less rapid increase than has taken place: that
the country would now have contained less capital, and maintained a
smaller population, so that notwithstanding the inferiority of the soil,
the price of corn would not have been higher, nor profits lower, than at
present; rent alone would certainly have been lower. We may suppose two
islands, which, being alike in extent, in natural fertility, and
industrial advancement, have up to a certain time been equal in
population and capital, and have had equal rentals, and the same price
of corn. Let us imagine a tithe imposed in one of these islands, but not
in the other. There will be immediately a difference in the price of
corn, and therefore probably in profits. While profits are not tending
downwards in either country, that is, while improvements in the
production of necessaries fully keep pace Edition: current; Page: [845]
with the increase of population, this difference of prices and profits
between the islands may continue. But if, in the untithed island,
capital increases, and population along with it, more than enough to
counterbalance any improvements which take place, the price of corn will
gradually rise, profits fwillf fall, and rent will increase; while in
the tithed island capital and population will either not increase
(beyond what is balanced by the improvements), or if they do, will
increase in a less degree; so that rent and the price of corn will
either not rise at all, or rise more slowly. Rent, therefore, will soon
be higher in the untithed than in the tithed island, and profits not so
much higher, nor corn so much cheaper, as they were on the first
imposition of the tithe. These effects will be progressive. At the end
of every ten years there will be a greater difference between the
rentals and between the aggregate wealth and population of the two
islands, and a less difference in profits and in the price of corn.

At what point will these last differences entirely cease, and the
temporary effect of taxes on agricultural produce, in raising the price,
have entirely given place to gtheg ultimate effect, that of limiting the
total produce of the country? Though the untithed island is always
verging towards the point at which the price of food would overtake that
in the tithed island, its progress towards that point naturally slackens
as it draws nearer to attaining it; since—the difference between the two
islands in the rapidity of accumulation depending upon the difference in
the rates of profit—in proportion as these approximate, the movement
which draws them closer together, abates of its force. The one may not
actually overtake the other, until both islands reach the minimum of
profits: up to that point, the tithed island may continue more or less
ahead of the untithed island in the price of corn: considerably ahead if
it is far from the minimum, and is therefore accumulating rapidly; very
little ahead if it is near the minimum, and accumulating slowly.

But whatever is true of the tithed and untithed islands in our
hypothetical case, is true of any country having a tithe, compared with
the same country if it had never had a tithe.

In England the great emigration of capital, and the almost periodical
occurrence of commercial crises through the speculations occasioned by
the habitually low rate of profit, are indications that profit has
attained the practical, though not the ultimate minimum, and that all
the savings which take place (beyond what improvements, tending to the
cheapening of necessaries, make room for) are either sent abroad for
investment, or periodically swept away. There can therefore, I think, be
little doubt that if England had never had a tithe, or any tax on
agricultural produce, the price of corn would have been by this time as
high, and the rate of profits Edition: current; Page: [846] as low, as
at present. Independently of the more rapid accumulation which would
have taken place if profits had not been prematurely lowered by these
imposts; the mere saving of a part of the capital which has been wasted
in unsuccessful speculations, and the keeping at home a part of that
which has been sent abroad, would have been quite sufficient to produce
the effect. I think, therefore, with Mr. Senior, that the tithe, even
before its commutation, had ceased to be a cause of high prices or low
profits, and had become a mere deducation from rent; its other effects
being, that it caused the country to have no greater capital, no larger
production, and no more numerous population than if it had been
one-tenth less fertile than it is; or let us rather say one-twentieth
(considering how great a portion of the land of Great Britain was
tithe-free).

But though tithes and other taxes on agricultural produce, when of long
standing, heitherh do not raise the price of food iandi lower profits at
all, or if at all, not in proportion to the tax; yet the abrogation of
such taxes, when they exist, does not the less diminish price, and, in
general, raise the rate of profit. The abolition of a tithe takes
one-tenth from the cost of production, and consequently from the price,
of all agricultural produce; and unless it permanently raises the
labourer’s requirements, it lowers the cost of labour, and raises
profits. Rent, estimated in money or in commodities, generally remains
as before; estimated in agricultural produce, it is raised. The country
adds as much by the repeal of a tithe, to the margin which intervenes
between it and the stationary state, as jisj cut off from that margin by
kak tithe when first imposed. Accumulation is greatly accelerated; and
if population also increases, the price of corn immediately begins to
recover itself, and rent to rise; thus gradually transferring the
benefit of the remission, from the consumer to the landlord.

The effects which thus result from abolishing tithe, result equally from
what has been done by the arrangements under the lCommutation Act for
converting it into a rent-charge. When the tax, instead of being levied
on the whole produce of the soil, is levied only from the portions which
pay rent, and does not touch any fresh extension of cultivation, the tax
no longer forms any part of the cost of production of the portion of the
produce which regulates the price of all the rest. The land or capital
which pays no rent, can now send its produce to market one-tenth
cheaper. The commutation of tithe ought therefore to have produced a
considerable fall in the average price of corn. If it had not come so
gradually into operation, and if the price of corn had not during the
same period been under the influence of several other causes of change,
the effect would probably have Edition: current; Page: [847] been
markedly conspicuous. As it is, there can be no doubt that this
circumstance has had its share in the fall which has taken place in the
cost of production and in the price of home-grown produce; though the
effects of the great agricultural improvements which have been
simultaneously advancing, mand of the free admission of agricultural
produce from foreign countries,m have masked those of the other cause.
This fall of price would not in itself have any tendency injurious to
the landlord, since corn-rents are increased in the same ratio in which
the price of corn is diminished. But neither does it in any way tend to
increase his income. The rent-charge, therefore, which is substituted
for tithe, is a dead loss to him nat the expiration of existing leasesn:
and the commutation of tithe was not a mere alteration in the mode in
which the landlord bore an existing burthen, but the imposition of a new
one; relief being afforded to the consumer at the expense of the
landlord, who, however, begins immediately to receive progressive
indemnification at the consumer’s expense, by the impulse given to
accumulation and population.

§ 5. [Effects of discriminating duties] We have hitherto inquired into
the effects of taxes on commodities, on the assumption that they are
levied impartially on every mode in which the commodity can be produced
or brought to market. Another class of considerations is opened, if we
suppose that this impartiality is not maintained, and that the tax is
imposed, not on the commodity, but on some particular mode of obtaining
it.

Suppose that a commodity is capable of being made by two different
processes; as a manufactured commodity may be produced either by hand or
by steam-power; sugar may be made either from the sugar-cane or from
beet-root, cattle fattened either on hay and green crops, or on oil-cake
and the refuse of breweries. It is the interest of the community, that
of the two methods, producers should adopt that which produces the best
article at the lowest price. This being also the interest of the
producers, unless protected against competition, and shielded from the
penalties of indolence; the process most advantageous to the community
is that which, if anot interfered with by government, they ultimatelya
find it to their advantage to adopt. Suppose however that a tax is laid
on one of the processes, and no tax at all, or one of smaller amount, on
the other. If the taxed process is the one which the producers would not
have adopted, the measure is simply nugatory. But if the tax falls, as
it is of course intended to do, upon the one which they would have
adopted, it creates an artificial motive for preferring the untaxed
process, though the inferior of the two. If, therefore, it has any
effect at all, it causes the commodity to be produced of worse Edition:
current; Page: [848] quality, or at a greater expense of labour; it
causes so much of the labour of the community to be wasted, and the
capital employed in supporting and remunerating btheb labour to be
expended as uselessly, as if it were spent in hiring men to dig holes
and fill them up again. This waste of labour and capital constitutes an
addition to the cost of production of the commodity, which raises its
value and price in a corresponding ratio, and thus the owners of the
capital are indemnified. The loss falls on the consumers; though the
capital of the country is also eventually diminished, by the diminution
of their means of saving, and in some degree, of their inducements to
save.

The kind of tax, therefore, which comes under the general denomination
of a discriminating duty, transgresses the rule that taxes should take
as little as possible from the tax-payer beyond what they bring into the
treasury of the state. A discriminating duty makes the consumer pay two
distinct taxes, only one of which is paid to the government, and that
frequently the less onerous of the two. If a tax were laid on sugar
produced from the cane, leaving the sugar from beet-root untaxed, then
in so far as cane sugar continued to be used, the tax on it would be
paid to the treasury, and might be as unobjectionable as cmost other
taxesc; but if cane sugar, having previously been cheaper than beet-root
sugar, was now dearer, and beet-root sugar was to any considerable
amount substituted for it, and fields laid out and manufactories
established in consequence, the government would gain no revenue from
the beet-root sugar, while the consumers of it would pay a real tax.
They would pay for beet-root sugar more than they had previously paid
for cane sugar, and the difference would go to indemnify producers for a
portion of the labour of the country actually thrown away, in producing
by the labour of (say) three hundred men, what could be obtained by the
other process with the labour of two hundred.

One of the commonest cases of discriminating duties, is that of a tax on
the importation of a commodity capable of being produced at home,
unaccompanied by an equivalent tax on the home production. A commodity
is never permanently imported, unless it can be obtained from abroad at
a smaller cost of labour and capital on the whole, than is necessary for
producing it. If, therefore, by a duty on the importation, it is
rendered cheaper to produce the article than to import it, an extra
quantity of labour and capital is expended, without any extra result.
The labour is useless, and the capital is spent in paying people for
laboriously doing nothing. All custom duties which operate as an
encouragement to the home production of the taxed article, are thus an
eminently wasteful mode of raising a revenue.

Edition: current; Page: [849]
This character belongs in a peculiar degree to custom duties on the
produce of land, unless countervailed by excise duties on the home
production. Such taxes bring less into the public treasury, compared
with what they take from the consumers, than any other imposts to which
civilized nations are dusually subjectd. If the wheat produced in a
country is twenty millions of quarters, and the consumption twenty-one
millions, a million being annually imported, and if on this million a
duty is laid which raises the price ten shillings per quarter, the price
which is raised is not that of the million only, but of the whole
twenty-one millions. Taking the most favourable, but extremely
improbable supposition, that the importation is not at all checked, nor
the home production enlarged, the state gains a revenue of only half a
million, while the consumers are taxed ten millions and a half; the ten
millions being a contribution to the home growers, who are forced by
competition to resign it all to the landlords. The consumer thus pays to
the owners of land an additional tax, equal to twenty times that which
he pays to the state. Let us now suppose that the tax really checks
importation. Suppose importation stopped altogether in ordinary years;
it being found that the million of quarters can be obtained, by a more
elaborate cultivation, or by breaking up inferior land, at a less
advance than ten shillings upon the previous price—say, for instance,
five shillings a quarter. The revenue now obtains nothing, except from
the extraordinary imports which may happen to take place in a season of
scarcity. But the consumers pay every year a tax of five shillings on
the whole twenty-one millions of quarters, amounting to 5¼ millions
sterling. Of this the odd 250,000l. goes to compensate the growers of
the last million of quarters for the labour and capital wasted under the
compulsion of the law. The remaining five millions go to enrich the
landlords as before.

Such is the operation of what are technically termed Corn Laws, when
first laid on; and such continues to be their operation, so long as they
have any effect at all in raising the price of corn. But I am by no
means of opinion that in the long run they keep up either prices or
rents in the degree which these considerations might lead us to suppose.
What we have said respecting the effect of tithes and other taxes on
agricultural produce, applies in a great degree to corn laws: they
anticipate artificially a rise of price and of rent, which would at all
events have taken place through the increase of population and of
production. The difference between a country without corn laws, and a
country which has long had corn laws, is not so much that the last has a
higher price or a larger rental, but that it has the same price and the
same rental with a smaller aggregate capital and a smaller population.
The imposition of corn laws raises rents, but retards that progress of
accumulation which would in no long period have raised Edition: current;
Page: [850] them fully as much. The repeal of corn laws tends to lower
rents, but it unchains a force which, in a progressive state of capital
and population, restores and even increases the former amount. There is
every reason to expect that under the virtually free importation of
agricultural produce, eat laste extorted from the ruling powers of this
country, the price of food, if population goes on increasingf, will
gradually but steadily rise; though this effect may for a time be
postponed by the strong current which in this country has set in (and
the impulse gis extendingg itself to other countries) towards the
himprovementh of agricultural science, and its increased application to
practice.

What we have said of duties on importation generally, is equally
applicable to discriminating duties which favour importation from one
place or in one particular manner, in contradistinction to others: such
as the preference given to the produce of a colony, or of a country with
which there is a commercial treaty: or the higher duties iformerly
imposedi by our navigation laws on goods imported in other than British
shipping. Whatever else may be alleged in favour of such distinctions,
whenever they are not nugatory, they are economically wasteful. They
induce a resort to a more costly mode of obtaining a commodity, in lieu
of one less costly, and thus cause a portion of the labour which the
country employs in providing itself with foreign commodities, to be
sacrificed without return.

§ 6. [Effects produced on international exchange by duties on exports
and on imports] There is one more point relating to the operation of
taxes on commodities conveyed from one country to another, which
requires notice: the influence which they exert on international
exchanges. Every tax on a commodity tends to raise its price, and
consequently to lessen the demand for it in the market in which ait isa
sold. All taxes on international trade tend, therefore, to produce a
disturbance and a re-adjustment of what we have termed the Equation of
International Demand. This consideration leads to some rather curious
consequences, which have been pointed out in the separate essay on
International Commerce, already several times referred to in this
treatise.

Taxes on foreign trade are of two kinds—taxes on imports, and on
exports. On the first aspect of the matter it would seem that both these
taxes are paid by the consumers of the commodity; that taxes on exports
consequently fall entirely on foreigners, taxes on imports wholly on the
home consumer. The true state of the case, however, is much more
complicated.

Edition: current; Page: [851]
“By taxing exports, we may, in certain circumstances, produce a division
of the advantage of the trade more favourable to ourselves. In some
cases we may draw into our coffers, at the expense of foreigners, not
only the whole tax, but more than the tax: in other cases, we should
gain exactly the tax; in others, less than the tax. In this last case, a
part of the tax is borne by ourselves: possibly the whole, possibly
even, as we shall show, more than the whole.”

Reverting to the suppositious case employed in the Essay, of a trade
between Germany and England in broadcloth and linen, “suppose that
England taxes her export of cloth, the tax not being supposed high
enough to induce Germany to produce cloth for herself. The price at
which cloth can be sold in Germany is augmented by the tax. This will
probably diminish the quantity consumed. It may diminish it so much
that, even at the increased price, there will not be required so great a
money value as before. Or it may not diminish it at all, or so little,
that in consequence of the higher price, a greater money value will be
purchased than before. In this last case, England will gain, at the
expense of Germany, not only the whole amount of the duty, but more;
for, the money value of her exports to Germany being increased, while
her imports remain the same, money will flow into England from Germany.
The price of cloth will rise in England, and consequently in Germany;
but the price of linen will fall in Germany, and consequently in
England. We shall export less cloth, and import more linen, till the
equilibrium is restored. It thus appears (what is at first sight
somewhat remarkable) that by taxing her exports, England would, in some
conceivable circumstances, not only gain from her foreign customers the
whole amount of the tax, but would also get her imports cheaper. She
would get them cheaper in two ways; for she would obtain them for less
money, and would have more money to purchase them with. Germany, on the
other hand, would suffer doubly: she would have to pay for her cloth a
price increased not only by the duty, but by the influx of money into
England, while the same change in the distribution of the circulating
medium would leave her less money to purchase it with.

“This, however, is only one of three possible cases. If, after the
imposition of the duty, Germany requires so diminished a quantity of
cloth, that its total value is exactly the same as before, the balance
of trade bwouldb be undisturbed; England will gain the duty, Germany
will lose it, and nothing more. If, again, the imposition of the duty
occasions such a falling off in the demand that Germany requires a less
pecuniary value than before, our exports will no longer pay for our
imports; money must pass from England into Germany; and Germany’s share
of the advantage of the trade will be increased. By the change in the
distribution of money, cloth will fall in Edition: current; Page: [852]
England; and therefore it will, of course, fall in Germany. Thus Germany
will not pay the whole of the tax. From the same cause, linen will rise
in Germany, and consequently in England. When this alteration of prices
has so adjusted the demand, that the cloth and the linen again pay for
one another, the result is that Germany has paid only a part of the tax,
and the remainder of what has been received into our treasury has come
indirectly out of the pockets of our own consumers of linen, who pay a
higher price for that imported commodity in consequence of the tax on
our exports, while at the same time they, in consequence of the efflux
of money and the fall of prices, have smaller money incomes wherewith to
pay for the linen at that advanced price.

“It is not an impossible supposition that by taxing our exports we might
not only gain nothing from the foreigner, the tax being paid out of our
own pockets, but might even compel our own people to pay a second tax to
the foreigner. Suppose, as before, that the demand of Germany for cloth
falls off so much on the imposition of the duty, that she requires a
smaller money value than before, but that the case is so different with
linen in England, that when the price rises the demand either does not
fall off at all, or so little that the money value required is greater
than before. The first effect of laying on the duty is, as before, that
the cloth exported will no longer pay for the linen imported. Money will
therefore flow out of England into Germany. One effect is to raise the
price of linen in Germany, and consequently in England. But this, by the
supposition, instead of stopping the efflux of money, only makes it
greater, because the higher the price, the greater the money value of
the linen consumed. The balance, therefore, can only be restored by the
other effect, which is going on at the same time, namely, the fall of
cloth in the English and consequently in the German market. Even when
cloth has fallen so low that its price with the duty is only equal to
what its price without the duty was at first, it is not a necessary
consequence that the fall will stop; for the same amount of exportation
as before will not now suffice to pay the increased money value of the
imports; and although the German consumers have now not only cloth at
the old price, but likewise increased money incomes, it is not certain
that they will be inclined to employ the increase of their incomes in
increasing their purchases of cloth. The price of cloth, therefore, must
perhaps fall, to restore the equilibrium, more than the whole amount of
the duty; Germany may be enabled to import cloth at a lower price when
it is taxed, than when it was untaxed: and this gain she will acquire at
the expense of the English consumers of linen, who, in addition, will be
the real payers of the whole of what is received at their own
custom-house under the name of duties on the export of cloth.”

It is almost unnecessary to remark that cloth and linen are here merely
Edition: current; Page: [853] representatives of exports and imports in
general; and that the effect which a tax on exports might have in
increasing the cost of imports, would affect the imports from all
countries, and not peculiarly the articles which might be imported from
the particular country to which the taxed exports were sent.

“Such are the extremely various effects which may result to ourselves
and to our customers from the imposition of taxes on our exports; and
the determining circumstances are of a nature so imperfectly
ascertainable, that it must be almost impossible to decide with any
certainty, even after the tax has been imposed, whether we have been
gainers by it or losers.” In general however there could be little doubt
that a country which imposed such taxes would succeed in making foreign
countries contribute something to its revenue; but unless the taxed
article be one for which their demand is extremely urgent, they will
seldom pay the whole of the amount which the tax brings in.* “In any
case, whatever we gain is lost by somebody else, and there is the
expense of the collection besides: if international morality, therefore,
were rightly understood and acted upon, such taxes, as being contrary to
the universal weal, would not exist.”

Thus far of duties on exports. We now proceed to the more ordinary case
of duties on imports. “We have had an example of a tax on exports, that
is, on foreigners, falling in part on ourselves. We shall therefore not
be surprised if we find a tax on imports, that is, on ourselves, partly
falling upon foreigners.

“Instead of taxing the cloth which we export, suppose that we tax the
linen which we import. The duty which we are now supposing must not be
what is termed a protecting duty, that is, a duty sufficiently high to
induce us to produce the article at home. If it had this effect, it
would destroy entirely the trade both in cloth and in linen, and both
countries would lose the whole of the advantage which they previously
gained by exchanging those commodities with one another. We suppose a
duty which might diminish the consumption of the article, but which
would not prevent us from continuing to import, as before, whatever
linen we did consume.

“The equilibrium of trade would be disturbed if the imposition of the
tax diminished, in the slightest degree, the quantity of linen consumed.
For, as the tax is levied at our own custom-house, the German exporter
only receives the same price as formerly, though the English consumer
pays a higher one. If, therefore, there be any diminution of the
quantity bought, although a larger sum of money may be actually laid out
in the article, Edition: current; Page: [854] a smaller one will be due
from England to Germany: this sum will no longer be an equivalent for
the sum due from Germany to England for cloth, the balance therefore
must be paid in money. Prices will fall in Germany and rise in England;
linen will fall in the German market; cloth will rise in the English.
The Germans will pay a higher price for cloth, and will have smaller
money incomes to buy it with; while the English will obtain linen
cheaper, that is, its price will exceed what it previously was by less
than the amount of the duty, while their means of purchasing it will be
increased by the increase of their money incomes.

“If the imposition of the tax does not diminish the demand, it will
leave the trade exactly as it was before. We shall import as much, and
export as much; the whole of the tax will be paid out of our own
pockets.

“But the imposition of a tax on a commodity almost always diminishes the
demand more or less; and it can never, or scarcely ever, increase the
demand. It may, therefore, be laid down as a principle, that a tax on
imported commodities, when it really operates as a tax, and not as a
prohibition either total or partial, almost always falls in part upon
the foreigners who consume our goods; and that this is a mode in which a
nation may appropriate to itself, at the expense of foreigners, a larger
share than would otherwise belong to it of the increase in the general
productiveness of the labour and capital of the world, which results
from the interchange of commodities among nations.”[*]

Those are, therefore, in the right who maintain that taxes on imports
are partly paid by foreigners; but they are mistaken when they say, that
it is by the foreign producer. It is not on the person from whom we buy,
but on all those who buy from us, that a portion of our custom-duties
spontaneously falls. It is the foreign consumer of our exported
commodities, who is obliged to pay a higher price for them because we
maintain revenue duties on foreign goods.

There are but two cases in which duties on commodities can in any
degree, or in any manner, fall on the producer. One is, when the article
is a strict monopoly, and at a scarcity price. The price in this case
being only limited by the desires of the buyer; the sum obtained cfromc
the restricted supply being the utmost which the buyers would consent to
give rather than go without it; if the treasury interprets a part of
this, the price cannot be further raised to compensate for the tax, and
it must be paid from the monopoly profits. A tax on rare and high-priced
wines will fall wholly on the growers, or rather, on the owners of the
vineyards. The second case in which the producer sometimes bears a
portion of the tax, is more important: Edition: current; Page: [855] the
case of duties on the produce of land or of mines. These might be so
high as to diminish materially the demand for the produce, and compel
the abandonment of some of the inferior qualities of land or mines.
Supposing this to be the effect, the consumers, both in the country
itself and in those which dealt with it, would obtain the produce at
smaller cost; and a part only, instead of the whole, of the duty would
fall on the purchaser, who would be indemnified chiefly at the expense
of the land-owners or mine-owners in the producing country.

Duties on importation may, then, be divided “into two classes: those
which have the effect of encouraging some particular branch of domestic
industry, and those which have not. The former are purely mischievous,
both to the country imposing them, and to those with whom it trades.
They prevent a saving of labour and capital, which, if permitted to be
made, would be divided in some proportion or other between the importing
country and the countries which buy what that country does or might
export.

“The other class of duties are those which do not encourage one mode of
procuring an article at the expense of another, but allow interchange to
take place just as if the duty did not exist, and to produce the saving
of labour which constitutes the motive to international, as to all other
commerce. Of this kind are duties on the importation of any commodity
which could not by any possibility be produced at home; and duties not
sufficiently high to counterbalance the difference of expense between
the production of the article at home and its importation. Of the money
which is brought into the treasury of any country by taxes of this last
description, a part only is paid by the people of that country; the
remainder by the foreign consumers of their goods.

“Nevertheless, this latter kind of taxes are in principle as ineligible
as the former, though not precisely on the same ground. A protecting
duty can never be a cause of gain, but always and necessarily of loss,
to the country imposing it, just so far as it is efficacious to its end.
A non-protecting duty, on the contrary, would in most cases be a source
of gain to the country imposing it, in so far as throwing part of the
weight of its taxes upon other people is a gain; but it would be a means
which it could seldom be advisable to adopt, being so easily
counteracted by a precisely similar proceeding on the other side.

“If England, in the case already supposed, sought to obtain for herself
more than her natural share of the advantage of the trade with Germany,
by imposing a duty upon linen, Germany would only have to impose a duty
upon cloth, sufficient to diminish the demand for that article about as
much as the demand for linen had been diminished in England by the tax.
Things would then be as before, and each country would pay its own tax.
Unless, indeed, the sum of the two duties exceeded the entire advantage
of Edition: current; Page: [856] the trade; for in that case the trade,
and its advantage, would cease entirely.

“There would be no advantage, therefore, in imposing duties of this
kind, with a view to gain by them in the manner which has been pointed
out. But when any part of the revenue is derived from taxes on
commodities, these may often be as little objectionable as the rest. It
is evident, too, that considerations of reciprocity, which are quite
unessential when the matter in debate is a protecting duty, are of
material importance when the repeal of duties of this other description
is discussed. A country cannot be expected to renounce the power of
taxing foreigners, unless foreigners will in return practise towards
itself the same forbearance. The only mode in which a country can save
itself from being a loser by the revenue duties imposed by other
countries on its commodities, is to impose corresponding revenues duties
on theirs. Only it must take care that those duties be not so high as to
exceed all that remains of the advantage of the trade, and put an end to
importation altogether, causing the article to be either produced at
home, or imported from another and dearer market.”[*]

Edition: current; Page: [857]


CHAPTER V: Of Some Other Taxes

§ 1. [Taxes on contracts] Besides direct taxes on income, and taxes on
consumption, the financial systems of most countries comprise a variety
of miscellaneous imposts, not strictly included in either class. The
modern European systems retain many such taxes, though in much less
number and variety than those semi-barbarous governments which European
influence has not yet reached. In some of these, scarcely any incident
of life has escaped being made an excuse for some fiscal exaction;
hardly any act, not belonging to daily routine, can be performed by any
one, without obtaining leave from some agent of government, which is
only granted in consideration of a payment: especially when the act
requires the aid or the peculiar guarantee of a public authority. In the
present treatise we may confine our attention to such taxes as lately
existed, or still exist, in countries usually classed as civilized.

In almost all nations a considerable revenue is drawn from taxes on
contracts. These are imposed in various forms. One expedient is that of
taxing the legal instrument which serves as evidence of the contract,
and which is commonly the only evidence legally admissible. In England,
scarcely any contract is binding unless executed on stamped paper, which
has paid a tax to government; and auntil very lately, when the contract
related to property the tax was proportionally much heavier on the
smaller than on the larger transactions; which is still true of some of
those taxesa. There are also stamp-duties on the legal instruments which
are evidence of the fulfilment of contracts; such as acknowledgments of
receipt, and deeds of release. Taxes on contracts are not always levied
by means of stamps. The duty on sales by auction, abrogated by Sir
Robert Peel, was an instance in point. The taxes on transfers of landed
property, in France, are another: in England bthereb are stamp-duties.
In some countries, contracts of many kinds are not valid unless
registered, and their registration is made an occasion for a tax.

Of taxes on contracts, the most important are those on the transfer of
Edition: current; Page: [858] property; chiefly on purchases and sales.
Taxes on the sale of consumable commodities are simply taxes on those
commodities. If they affect only some particular commodities, they raise
the prices of those commodities, and are paid by the consumer. If the
attempt were made to tax all purchases and sales, which, however absurd,
was for centuries the law of Spain, the tax, if it could be enforced,
would be equivalent to a tax on all commodities, and would not affect
prices: if levied from the sellers, it would be a tax on profits, if
from the buyers, a tax on consumption; and neither class could throw the
burthen upon the other. If confined to some one mode of sale, as for
example by auction, it discourages recourse to that mode, and if of any
material amount, prevents it from being adopted at all, unless in a case
of emergency; in which case as the seller is under a necessity to sell,
but the buyer under no necessity to buy, the tax falls on the seller;
and this was the strongest of the objections to the auction duty: it
almost always fell on a necessitous person, and in the ccrisis of his
necessities.

Taxes on the purchase and sale of land are, in most countries, liable to
the same objection. Landed property in old countries is seldom parted
with, except from reduced circumstances, or some urgent need: the
seller, therefore, must take what he can get, while the buyer, whose
object is an investment, makes his calculations on the interest which he
can obtain for his money in other ways, and will not buy if he is
charged with a government tax on the transaction.* It has indeed been
objected, that this argument would not apply if all modes of permanent
investment, such as the purchase of government securities, shares in
joint-stock companies, mortgages, and the like, were subject to the same
tax. But even then, if paid by the buyer, it would be equivalent to a
tax on interest: if sufficiently heavy to be of any importance, it would
disturb the established relation between interest and profit; and the
disturbance would redress itself by a rise in the rate of interest, and
a fall of the price of land and of all securities. It appears to me,
therefore, that the seller is the person by whom such taxes, unless
under peculiar circumstances, will dgenerallyd be borne.

All taxes must be condemned which throw obstacles in the way of the sale
of land, or other instruments of production. Such sales tend naturally
to render the property more productive. The seller, whether moved by
necessity or choice, is probably some one who is either without the
means, Edition: current; Page: [859] or without the capacity, to make
the most advantageous use of the property for productive purposes; while
the buyer, on the other hand, is at any rate not needy, and is
efrequentlye both inclined and able to improve the property, since, as
it is worth more to such a person than to any other, he is likely to
offer the highest price for it. All taxes, therefore, and all
difficulties and expenses, annexed to such contracts, are decidedly
detrimental; especially in the case of land, the source of subsistence,
and the original foundation of all wealth, on the improvement of which,
therefore, so much depends. Too great facilities cannot be given to
enable land to pass into the hands, and assume the modes of aggregation
or division, most conducive to its productiveness. If landed properties
are too large, alienation should be free, in order that they may be
subdivided; if too small, in order that they may be united. All taxes on
the transfer of landed property should be abolished; but, as the
landlords have no claim to be relieved from any reservation which the
state has hitherto made in its own favour from the amount of their rent,
an annual impost equivalent to the average produce of these taxes should
be distributed over the land generally, in the form of a land-tax.f

Edition: current; Page: [860]
Some of the taxes on contracts are very pernicious, imposing a virtual
penalty upon transactions which it ought to be the policy of the
legislator to encourage. Of this sort is the stamp-duty on leases, which
in a country of large properties are an essential condition of good
agriculture; and the gtaxesg on insurances, a direct discouragement to
prudence and forethought.h

§ 2. [Taxes on communication] Nearly allied to the taxes on contracts
are those on communication. The principal of these is the postage tax;
to which may be added ataxesa on advertisements, and bon newspapers,
which are taxes on the communication of information.

The common mode of levying a tax on the conveyance of letters, is by
making the government the sole authorized carrier of them, and demanding
a monopoly price. When this price is so moderate as it is in this
country under the uniform penny postage, scarcely if at all exceeding
what would be charged under the freest competition by any private
company, it can hardly be considered as taxation, but rather as the
profits of a business; whatever excess there is above the ordinary
profits of stock being a fair result of the saving of expense, caused by
having only one establishment and one set of arrangements for the whole
country, instead of many competing ones. The business, too, being one
which both can and ought to be conducted on fixed rules, is one of the
cfew businesses which it is not unsuitable to a government to conduct.
The post office, therefore, is at present one of the best of the sources
from which this country derives its revenue. But a postage much
exceeding what would be paid for the same service in a system of
freedom, is not a desirable tax. Its chief weight falls on letters of
business, and increases the expense of mercantile relations between
distant places. It is like an attempt to raise a large revenue by
Edition: current; Page: [861] heavy tolls: it obstructs all operations
by which goods are conveyed from place to place, and discourages the
production of commodities in one place for consumption in another; which
is not only in itself one of the greatest sources of economy of labour,
but is a necessary condition of almost all improvements in production,
and one of the strongest stimulants to industryd, and promoters of
civilizationd.

eThee tax on advertisements fwasf not free from the same objection,
since in whatever degree advertisements are useful to business, by
facilitating the coming together of the dealer or producer and the
consumer, in that same degree, if the tax be high enough to be a serious
discouragement to advertising, it prolongs the period during which goods
remain unsold, and capital locked up in idleness.g

A tax on newspapers is objectionable, not so much where it does fall as
where it does not, that is, where it prevents newspapers from being
used. To the generality of those who hbuy them, newspapers are a luxury
which they can as well afford to pay for as any other indulgence, and
which is as unexceptionable a source of revenue. But to that large part
of the community who have been taught to read, but have received little
other intellectual education, newspapers are the source of nearly all
the general information which they possess, and of nearly all their
acquaintance with the ideas and topics current among mankind; and an
interest is more easily excited in newspapers, than in books or other
more recondite sources of instruction. Newspapers icontribute so little,
in a direct way toi the origination of useful ideas, that many persons
undervalue the importance of their office in disseminating jthem. They
correct many prejudices and superstitions, and keep up aj habit of
discussion, and interest in public concerns, the absence of which is a
great cause of the stagnation of mind usually found in the lower and
middle, if not in all, ranks, of those countries where newspapers of an
important or interesting character do not exist. There ought to be no
taxes k(as in this country there now are not)k which render this great
diffuser of linformationl, of mental excitement, and mental exercise,
less accessible to that portion of the public which most needs to be
carried minto a region of ideas and interests beyond its own limited
horizon.

Edition: current; Page: [862]
§ 3. [Law Taxes] In the enumeration of bad taxes, a conspicuous place
must be assigned to law taxes; which extract a revenue for the state
from the various operations involved in an application to the tribunals.
Like all needless expenses attached to law proceedings, they are a tax
on redress, and therefore a premium on injury. Although such taxes have
been abolished in this country as a general source of revenue, they
still exist in the form of fees of court, for defraying the expense of
the courts of justice; under the idea, apparently, that those may fairly
be required to bear the expenses of the administration of justice, who
reap the benefit of it. The fallacy of this doctrine was powerfully
exposed by Bentham. As he remarked, those who are under the necessity of
going to law, are those who benefit least, not most, by the law and its
administration. To them the protection which the law affords has not
been complete, since they have been obliged to resort to a court of
justice to ascertain their rights, or maintain those rights against
infringement: while the remainder of the public have enjoyed the
immunity from injury conferred by the law and the tribunals, without the
inconvenience of an appeal to them.

§ 4. [Modes of taxation for local purposes] Besides the general taxes of
the State, there are in all or most countries local taxes, to defray any
expenses of a public nature which it is thought best to place under the
control or management of a local authority. Some of these expenses are
incurred for purposes in which the particular locality is solely or
chiefly interested; as the paving, cleansing, and lighting of the
streets; or the making and repairing of roads and bridges, which may be
important to people from any part of the country, but only in so far as
they, or goods ain which they have an interesta, pass along the roads or
over the bridges. In other cases again, the expenses are of a kind as
nationally important as any others, but are defrayed locally because
supposed more likely to be well administered by local bodies; as, in
England, the relief of the poor, and the support of gaols, and in some
other countries, of schools. To decide for what public objects local
superintendence is best suited, and what are those which should be kept
immediately under the central government, or under a mixed system of
local management and central superintendence, is a question not of
political economy, but of administration. It is an important principle,
however, that taxes imposed by a local authority, being less amenable to
publicity and discussion than the acts of the government, should always
be special—laid on for some definite service, and not exceeding the
expense actually incurred in rendering the service. Thus limited, it is
desirable, whenever practicable, that the burthen should fall on those
to whom the service is rendered; that the expense, for instance,
Edition: current; Page: [863] of roads and bridges, should be defrayed
by a toll on passengers and goods conveyed by them, thus dividing the
cost between those who use them for pleasure or convenience, and the
consumers of the goods which they enable to be brought to and from the
market at a diminished expense. When, however, the tolls have repaid
with interest the whole of the expenditure, the road or bridge should be
thrown open free of toll, that it may be used also by those to whom,
unless open gratuitously, it would be valueless; provision being made
for repairs either from the funds of the state, or by a rate levied on
the localities which reap the principal benefit.

In England, almost all local taxes are direct, (the coal duty of the
City of London, and a few similar imposts, being the chief exceptions,)
though the greatest part of the taxation for general purposes is
indirect. On the contrary, in France, Austria, and other countries where
direct taxation is much more largely employed by the state, the local
expenses of towns are principally defrayed by taxes levied on
commodities when entering them. These indirect taxes are much more
objectionable in towns than on the frontier, because the things which
the country supplies to the towns are chiefly the necessaries of life
and the materials of manufacture, while, of what a country imports from
foreign countries, the greater part usually consists of luxuries. An
octroi cannot produce a large revenue, without pressing severely upon
the labouring classes of the towns; unless their wages rise
proportionally, in which case the tax falls in a great measure on the
consumers of town produce, whether residing in town or country, since
capital will not remain in the towns if its profits fall bbelowb their
ordinary proportion as compared with the rural districts.

Edition: current; Page: [864]


CHAPTER VI: Comparison between Direct and Indirect Taxation

§ 1. [Arguments for and against direct taxation] Are direct or indirect
taxes the most eligible? This question, at all times interesting, has of
late excited a considerable amount of discussion. In England there is a
popular feeling, of old standing, in favour of indirect, or it should
rather be said in opposition to direct, taxation. The feeling is not
grounded on the merits of the case, and is of a apuerile kind. An
Englishman bdislikesb, not so much the payment, as the act of paying. He
dislikes seeing the face of the tax-collector, and being subjected to
his peremptory demand. Perhaps, too, the money which he is required to
pay directly out of his pocket is the only taxation which he is quite
sure that he pays at all. That a tax of cone shillingc per pound on tea,
or of dtwod shillings per bottle on wine, raises the price of each pound
of tea and bottle of wine which he consumes, by that and more than that
amount, cannot indeed be denied; it is the fact, and is intended to be
so, and he himself, at times, is perfectly aware of it; but it makes
hardly any impression on his practical feelings and associations,
serving to illustrate the distinction between what is merely known to be
true and what is felt to be so. The eunpopularitye of direct taxation,
contrasted with the easy manner in which the public consent to let
themselves be fleeced in the prices of commodities, has generated in
many friends of improvement a directly opposite mode of thinking to the
foregoing. They contend that the very reason which makes direct taxation
disagreeable, makes it preferable. Under it, every one knows how much he
really pays; and if he votes for a war, or any other expensive national
luxury, he does so with his eyes open to what it costs him. If all taxes
were direct, taxation would be much more fperceivedf than at present;
and there would be a security which now there is not, for economy in the
public expenditure.

Edition: current; Page: [865]
Although this argument is not without forceg, its weight is likely to be
constantly diminishing. The real incidence of indirect taxation is every
day more generally understood and more familiarly recognised: and
whatever else may be said of the hchanges which are taking place in the
tendencies of the human mind, it can scarcely, I think, be denied, that
things are more and more estimated according to their calculated value,
and less according to their non-essential accompaniments. The mere
distinction ibetween paying money directly to the tax-collector, and
contributing the same sum through the intervention of the tea-dealer or
the wine-merchant, jno longer makesj the whole difference between
dislike or opposition, and passive acquiescence. But further, while kany
suchk infirmity of the popular mind subsists, the argument grounded on
it tells partly on the other side of the question. If our present
revenue of labout seventyl millions were all raised by direct taxes, an
mextremem dissatisfaction would certainly arise at having to pay so
much; but while men’s minds are so little guided by reason, as such a
change of feeling from so irrelevant a cause would imply, nso great an
aversion to taxation omight not be an unqualifiedo good. Of the
pseventyp millions in question, nearly thirty are pledged, under the
most binding obligations, to those whose qpropertyq has been borrowed
and spent by the state: and while this debt remains unredeemed, a
greatly increased impatience of taxation would involve no little danger
of a breach of faith, similar to that which, in the defaulting states of
America, has been produced, and in some of them still continues, from
the same cause. That part, indeed, of the public expenditure, which is
devoted to the maintenance of civil and military establishments, r(that
is, all except the interest of the national debt,) affordss, in many of
its details,s ample scope for tretrenchment. But while umuch of the
revenue is wasted under the mere pretence of public service, so much of
the most important business of government is left undone, that whatever
can be rescued from useless expenditure is Edition: current; Page: [866]
urgently required for useful.r Whether the object be veducation; wa more
efficient and accessible administration of justicex;w reforms of any
kind which, like the Slave Emancipation, require compensation to
individual interests; or ywhat is as important as any of these, the
entertainment of a sufficient staff of able and zeducatedz public
servants, to conduct in a better than the present awkward manner the
business of legislation and administration; every one of these things
implies considerable expense, and many of them have again and again been
prevented by the reluctance which aexisteda to apply to Parliament for
an increased grant of public money, though b(besides that the existing
means would cprobably bec sufficient if applied to the proper purposes)b
the cost would be repaid, often a hundred-fold, in mere pecuniary
advantage to the community generally. dIf so great an addition were made
to the public dislike of taxation as might be the consequence of
confining it to the direct form, the classes who profit by the
misapplication of public money emighte probably succeed in saving that
by which they profit, at the expense of that which would only be useful
to the public.d

There is, however, a frequent plea in support of indirect taxation,
which must be altogether rejected, as grounded on a fallacy. We are
often told that taxes on commodities are less burthensome than other
taxes, because the contributor can escape from them by ceasing to use
the taxed commodity. He certainly can, if that be his object, deprive
the government of the money: but he does so by a sacrifice of his own
indulgences, which (if he chose to undergo it) would equally make up to
him for the same amount taken from him by direct taxation. Suppose a tax
laid on wine, sufficient to add five pounds to the price of the quantity
of wine which he consumes in a year. He has only (we are told) to
diminish his consumption of wine by 5l., and he escapes the burthen.
True: but if the 5l., instead of being laid on wine, had been taken from
him by an income tax, he could, by expending 5l. less in wine, equally
save the amount of the tax, so that the difference between the two cases
is really illusory. If the government takes from the contributor five
pounds a year, whether in one way or another, exactly that amount must
be retrenched from his consumption to leave him as well off Edition:
current; Page: [867] as before; and in either way the same amount of
sacrifice, neither more nor less, is imposed on him.

On the other hand, it is fsomef advantage on the side of indirect taxes,
that what they exact from the contributor is taken at a time and in a
manner likely to be convenient to him. It is paid at a time when he has
at any rate a payment to make; it causes, therefore, no additional
trouble, nor g(unless the tax be on necessaries)g any inconvenience but
what is inseparable from the payment of the amount. He can also, except
in the case of very perishable articles, select his own time for laying
in a stock of the commodity, and consequently for payment of the tax.
The producer or dealer who advances these taxes, is, indeed, sometimes
subjected to inconvenience; but, in the case of imported goods, this
inconvenience is reduced to a minimum by what is called the Warehousing
System, under which, instead of paying the duty at the time of
importation, he is only required to do so when he takes out the goods
for consumption, which is seldom done until he has either actually
found, or has the prospect of immediately finding, a purchaser.

The hstrongesth objection, however, to raising the whole or the greater
part of a large revenue by direct taxes, is the impossibility of
assessing them fairly iwithout a conscientious co-operation on the part
of the contributors, not to be hoped for in the present low state of
public moralityi. In the case of an income tax, jwe have already seen
that unless it be found practicable to exempt savings altogether from
the tax, the burthen cannotj be apportioned with any tolerable approach
to fairness upon those whose incomes are derived from kbusiness or
professionsk; and this is in fact admitted by most of the advocates of
direct taxation, who, I am afraid, generally get over the difficulty by
leaving those classes untaxed, and confining their projected income tax
to “realized property,” in which form it certainly has the merit of
being a very easy form of plunder. But enough has been said in
condemnation of this expedient. We have seen, however, that a house tax
is a form of direct taxation not liable to the same objections as an
income tax, and indeed liable to as few objections of any kind as
perhaps any of our indirect taxes. But it would be impossible to raise
by a house tax alone, the greatest part of the revenue of Great Britain,
without producing a very objectionable over-crowding of the population,
through the strong motive which all persons would have to avoid the tax
by restricting their house accommodation. Besides, even a house tax has
inequalities, and lconsequentl injustices; no tax is exempt from them,
and it is neither Edition: current; Page: [868] just nor politic to make
all the inequalities fall in the same places, by calling upon one tax to
defray the whole or the chief part of the public expenditure. So much of
the local taxation, in this country, being already in the form of a
house tax, it is probable that ten millions a year would be fully as
much as could beneficially be levied, through this medium, for general
purposes.

A certain amount of revenue may, as we have seen, be obtained without
injustice by a peculiar tax on rent. Besides the present land-tax, and
an equivalent for the revenue now derived from stamp duties on the
conveyance of land, some further taxation might, I have contended, at
some future period be imposed, to enable the state to participate in the
progressive increase of the incomes of landlords from natural causes.
Legacies and inheritances, we have also seen, ought to be subjected to
taxation sufficient to yield a considerable revenue. With these taxes,
and a house tax of suitable amount, we should, I think, have reached the
prudent limits of direct taxation, save in a national emergency so
urgent as to justify the government in disregarding the mamount ofm
inequality and unfairness nwhich may ultimately be found inseparable
from ann income tax. The remainder of the revenue would have to be
provided by taxes on consumption, and the question is, which of these
are the least objectionable.

§ 2. [What forms of indirect taxation are most eligible] There are some
forms of indirect taxation which must be peremptorily excluded. Taxes on
commodities, for revenue purposes, must not operate as protecting
duties, but must be levied impartially on every mode in which the
articles can be obtained, whether produced in the country itself, or
imported. An exclusion must also be put upon all taxes on the
necessaries of life, or on the materials or instruments employed in
producing those necessaries. Such taxes are always liable to encroach on
what should be left untaxed, the incomes barely sufficient for healthful
existence; and on the most favourable supposition, namely, that wages
rise to compensate the labourers for the tax, it operates as a peculiar
tax on profits, which is at once unjust, and detrimental to national
wealth.* What remain are taxes on luxuries. And Edition: current; Page:
[869] these have some properties which strongly recommend them. In the
first place, they can never, by any possibility, touch those whose whole
income is expended on necessaries; while they do reach those by whom
what is required for necessaries, is expended on indulgences. In the
next place, they operate in some cases as an useful, and the only
useful, kind of sumptuary law. I disclaim all asceticism, and by no
means wish to see discouraged, either by law or opinion, any indulgence
(consistent with the means and obligations of the person using it) which
is sought from a genuine inclination for, and enjoyment of, the thing
itself; but a great portion of the aexpensesa of the higher and middle
classes in most countries, and the greatest in this, is not incurred for
the sake of the pleasure afforded by the things on which the money is
spent, but from regard to opinion, and an idea that certain expenses are
expected from them, as an appendage of station; and I cannot but think
that expenditure of this sort is a most desirable subject of taxation.
If taxation discourages it, some good is done, and if not, no harm; for
in so far as taxes are levied on things which are desired and possessed
from motives of this description, nobody is the worse for them. When a
thing is bought not for its use but for its costliness, cheapness is no
recommendation. As Sismondi remarks, the consequence of cheapening
articles of vanity, is not that less is expended on such things, but
that the buyers substitute for the cheapened article some other which is
more costly, or a more elaborate quality of the same thing; and as the
inferior quality answered the purpose of vanity equally well when it was
equally expensive, a tax on the article bis reallyb paid by nobody: it
cisc a creation of public revenue by which nobody dlosesd.*

Edition: current; Page: [870]
§ 3. [Practical rules for indirect taxation] In order to reduce as much
as possible the inconveniences, and increase the advantages, incident to
taxes on commodities, the following are the practical rules which
suggest themselves. 1st. To raise as large a revenue as conveniently may
be, from those classes of luxuries which have most connexion with
vanity, and least with positive enjoyment; such as the more costly
qualities of all kinds of personal equipment and ornament. 2ndly.
Whenever possible, to demand the tax, not from the producer, but
directly from the consumer, since when levied on the producer it raises
the price always by more, and often by much more, than the mere amount
of the tax. Most of the minor assessed taxes in this country are
recommended by both these considerations. But with regard to horses and
carriages, as there are many persons to whom, from health or
constitution, these are not so much luxuries as necessaries, the tax
paid by those who have but one riding horse, or but one carriage,
especially of the cheaper descriptions, should be low; while taxation
should rise very rapidly with the number of horses and carriages, and
with their costliness. 3rdly. But as the only indirect taxes which yield
a large revenue are those which fall on articles of universal or very
general consumption, and as it is therefore necessary to have some taxes
on real luxuries, that is, on things which afford pleasure in
themselves, and are valued on that account rather than for their cost;
these taxes should, if possible, be so adjusted as to fall with the same
proportional weight on small, on moderate, and on large incomes. This is
not an easy matter; since the things which are the subjects of the more
productive taxes, are in proportion more largely consumed by the poorer
members of the community than by the rich. Tea, coffee, sugar, tobacco,
fermented drinks, can hardly be so taxed that the poor shall not bear
more than their due share of the burthen. Something might be done by
making the duty on the superior qualities, which are used by the richer
consumers, much higher in proportion to the value (instead of much
lower, as is almost universally the practice, under the present English
system); but in some cases the difficulty of at all Edition: current;
Page: [871] adjusting the duty to the value, so as to prevent evasion,
is said, with what truth I know not, to be insuperable; so that it is
thought necessary to levy the same fixed duty on all the qualities
alike: a flagrant injustice to the poorer class of contributors, unless
compensated by the existence of other taxes from which, as from the
present income tax, they are altogether exempt. 4thly. As far as is
consistent with the preceding rules, taxation should rather be
concentrated on a few articles than diffused over many, in order that
the expenses of collection may be smaller, and that as few employments
as possible may be burthensomely and vexatiously interfered with. 5thly.
Among luxuries of general consumption, taxation should by preference
attach itself to stimulants, because these, though in themselves as
legitimate aindulgences as any others, are more liable than most to be
used in excess, so that the check to consumption, naturally arising from
taxation, is on the whole better applied to them than to other things.
6thly. As far as other considerations permit, taxation should be
confined to imported articles, since these can be taxed with a less
degree of vexatious interference, and with fewer incidental bad effects,
than when a tax is levied on the field or on the workshop. Custom-duties
are, cæteris paribus, much less objectionable than excise: but they must
be laid only on things which either cannot, or at least will not, be
produced in the country itself; or else their production there must be
prohibited (as in England is the case with tobacco), or subjected to an
excise duty of equivalent amount. 7thly. No tax ought to be kept so high
as to furnish a motive to its evasion, too strong to be counteracted by
ordinary means of prevention: and especially no commodity should be
taxed so highly as to raise up a class of lawless characters, smugglers,
illicit distillers, and the like.

bOfb the excise and custom duties clatelyc existing in this country,
dall which are intrinsically unfit to form part of a good system of
taxation, have, since the last reforms by Mr. Gladstone, been got rid
ofd. Among these are all duties on ordinary articles of food, ewhether
for human beings or for cattle; those on ftimber,f as falling on the
materials of lodging, which is one of the necessaries of life; all
duties on the metals, and on implements made of them; gtaxesg on soap,
which is a necessary of cleanliness, and on tallow, the material both of
that and of hsomeh other necessaries; the tax on paper, Edition:
current; Page: [872] an indispensable instrument of almost all business
and of most kinds of instructioni. The duties which jnowj yield knearly
the wholek of the customs and excise revenue, those on sugar, coffee,
tea, wine, beer, spirits, and tobacco, are in themselves, where a large
amount of revenue is necessary, extremely proper taxes; but at present
grossly unjust, from the disproportionate weight with which they press
on the poorer classes; and some of them (those on spirits and tobacco)
are so high as to cause la considerablel amount of smuggling. It is
probable that most of these taxes mmightm bear a great reduction without
any material loss of revenue. In what manner the finer articles of
manufacture, consumed by the rich, might most advantageously be taxed, I
must leave to be decided by those who have the requisite practical
knowledge. The difficulty would be, to effect it without an inadmissible
degree of interference with production. In countries which, like the
United States, import the principal part of the finer manufactures which
they consume, there is little difficulty in the matter: and even where
nothing is imported but the raw material, that may be taxed, especially
the qualities of it which are exclusively employed for the fabrics used
by the richer class of consumers. Thus, in England a high custom-duty on
raw silk would be consistent with principle; and it might perhaps be
practicable to tax the finer qualities of cotton or linen yarn, whether
spun in the country itself or imported.

Edition: current; Page: [873]


CHAPTER VII: Of a National Debt

§ 1. [Is it desirable to defray extraordinary public expenses by loans?]
The question must now be considered, how far it is right or expedient to
raise money for the purposes of government, not by laying on taxes to
the amount required, but by taking a portion of the capital of the
country in the form of a loan, and charging the public revenue with only
the interest. Nothing needs be said about providing for temporary wants
by taking up money; for instance, by an issue of exchequer bills,
destined to be paid off, at furthest in a year or two, from the proceeds
of the existing taxes. This is a convenient expedient, and when the
government does not possess a treasure or hoard, is often a necessary
one, on the occurrence of extraordinary expenses, or of a temporary
failure in the ordinary sources of revenue. What we have to discuss is
the propriety of contracting a national debt of a permanent character;
defraying the expenses of a war, or of any season of difficulty, by
loans, to be redeemed either very gradually and at a distant period, or
not at all.

This question has aalready beena touched upon in the First Book.* We
bremarked, that if the capital taken in loans is abstracted from funds
either engaged in production, or destined to be employed in it, their
diversion from that purpose is equivalent to taking the amount from the
wages of the labouring classes. Borrowing, in this case, is not a
substitute for raising the supplies within the year. A government which
borrows does actually take the amount within the year, and that too by a
tax exclusively on the labouring classes: than which it could have done
nothing worse, if it had supplied its wants by avowed taxation; and in
that case the transaction, and its evils, would have ended with the
emergency; while by the circuitous mode adopted, the value exacted from
the labourers is gained, not by the state, but by the employers of
labour, the state remaining charged with the debt besides, and with its
interest in perpetuity. The system of public loans, in such
circumstances, may be pronounced the very worst which, in the present
state of civilization, is still included in the catalogue of financial
expedients.

Edition: current; Page: [874]
We however remarked that there are other circumstances in which loans
are not chargeable with these pernicious consequences: namely, first,
when what is borrowed is foreign capital, the overflowings of the
general accumulation of the world; or, secondly, when it is capital
which either would not have been saved at all unless this mode of
investment had been open to it, or after being saved, would have been
wasted in unproductive enterprises, or sent to seek employment in
foreign countries. When the progress of accumulation has reduced profits
either to the ultimate or to the practical minimum,—to the rate, less
than which would either put a stop to the increase of capital, or send
the whole of the new accumulations abroad; government may annually
intercept cthesec new accumulations, without trenching on the employment
or wages of the labouring classes in the country itself, or perhaps in
any other country. To this extent, therefore, the loan system may be
carried, without being liable to the utter and peremptory condemnation
which is due to it when it overpasses this limit. What is wanted is an
index to determine whether, in any given series of years, as during the
last dgreatd war for example, the limit has been exceeded or not.

Such an index exists, at once a certain and an obvious one. Did the
government, by its loan operations, augment the rate of interest? If it
only opened a channel for capital which would not otherwise have been
accumulated, or which, if accumulated, would not have been employed
within the country; this implies that the capital, which the government
took and expended, could not have found employment at the existing rate
of interest. So long as the loans do no more than absorb this surplus,
they prevent any tendency to a fall of the rate of interest, but they
cannot occasion any rise. When they do raise the rate of interest, as
they did in a most extraordinary degree during the eFrenche war, this is
positive proof that the government is a competitor for capital with the
ordinary channels of productive investment, and is carrying off, not
merely funds which would not, but funds which would, have found
productive employment within the country. To the full extent, therefore,
to which the loans of government, during the fwar, caused the rate of
interest to exceed what it was before, and what it has been since, those
loans gare chargeable with all the evils which have been describedg. If
it be objected that interest only rose because profits rose, I reply
that this does not weaken, but strengthens, the argument. If the
government loans produced the rise of profits by the great amount of
capital which they absorbed, by what means can they have had this
effect, unless by lowering the wages of labour? It will perhaps be said,
that what kept profits high during the war was not the drafts made on
the Edition: current; Page: [875] national capital by the loans, but the
rapid progress of industrial improvements. This, in a great measure, was
the fact; and it no doubt alleviated the hardship to the labouring
classes, and made the financial system which was pursued less actively
mischievous, but not hless contrary to principleh. These very
improvements in industry, made room for a larger amount of capital; and
the government, by draining away a great part of the annual
accumulations, did not indeed prevent that capital from existing
ultimately, (for it started into existence with great rapidity after the
peace,) but prevented it from existing at the time, and subtracted just
so much, while the war lasted, from distribution among productive
labourers. If the government had abstained from taking this capital by
loan, and had allowed it to reach the labourers, but had raised the
supplies which it required by a direct tax on the labouring classes, it
would have produced i(in every respect but the expense and inconvenience
of collecting the tax)i the very same economical effects jwhich it did
produce, except that we should not now have had the debt. The course it
actually took was therefore worse kthan the very worst mode which it
could possibly have adopted of raising the supplies within the yearl:
and the only excuse, or justification, which it admits of, (so far as
that excuse could be truly pleaded,) was hard necessity; the
impossibility of raising so enormous an annual sum by taxation, without
resorting to taxes which from their odiousness, or from the facility of
evasion, it would have been found impracticable to enforcel.

When government loans are limited to the overflowings of the national
capital, or to those accumulations which would not take place at all
unless suffered to overflow, they are at least not liable to this grave
condemnation: they occasion no privation to any one at the time, except
by the payment of the interest, and may even be beneficial to the
labouring class during the term of their expenditure, by employing in
the direct purchase of labour, as mthatm of soldiers, sailors, &c.,
funds which might otherwise have quitted the country altogether. In this
case therefore the question really is, what it is commonly supposed to
be in all cases, namely, a choice between a great sacrifice at once, and
a small one indefinitely prolonged. On this matter it seems rational to
think, that the prudence of a nation will dictate the same conduct as
the prudence of an individual; to submit to as much of the privation
immediately, as can easily be borne, and only when any further burthen
would distress or cripple them too much, to provide for the remainder by
mortgaging their future income. It is an excellent maxim to make present
resources suffice for present wants; the Edition: current; Page: [876]
future will have its own wants to provide for. On the other hand, it may
reasonably be taken into consideration that in na country increasing in
wealth,n the necessary expenses of government do not increase in the
same ratio as capital or population; any burthen, therefore, is always
less and less felt: and since those extraordinary expenses of government
which are fit to be incurred at all, are mostly beneficial beyond the
existing generation, there is no injustice in making posterity pay a
part of the price, if the inconvenience would be extreme of defraying
the whole of it by the exertions and sacrifices of the generation which
first incurred it.

§ 2. [Not desirable to redeem a national debt by a general contribution]
When a country, wisely or unwisely, has burthened itself with a debt,
ais ita expedient to take steps for redeeming that debt? In principle it
is impossible not to maintain the affirmative. It is true that the
payment of the interest, when the creditors are members of the same
community, is no national loss, but a mere transfer. The transfer,
however, being compulsory, is a serious evil, and the raising a great
extra revenue by any system of taxation necessitates so much expense,
vexation, disturbance of the channels of industry, and other mischiefs
over and above the mere payment of the money wanted by the government,
that to get rid of the necessity of such taxation is at all times worth
a considerable effort. The same amount of sacrifice which would have
been worth incurring to avoid contracting the debt, it is worth while to
incur, at any subsequent time, for the purpose of extinguishing it.

Two modes have been contemplated of paying off a national debt: either
at once by a general contribution, or gradually by a surplus revenue.
The first would be incomparably the best, if it were practicable; and
bit would be practicableb if it could justly be done by cassessment on
property alone. If property bore the whole interest of the debt,
property might, with great advantage to itself, pay it off; since this
would be merely surrendering to a creditor the principal sum, the whole
annual proceeds of which were already his by law; dandd would be
equivalent to what a landowner does when he sells part of his estate, to
free the remainder from a mortgage. But property, it needs hardly be
said, does not pay, and cannot justly be required to pay, the whole
interest of the debt. Some indeed affirm that it can, on the eplea that
the existing generation is only bound to pay the debts of its
predecessors from the assets it has received from them, and not from the
produce of its own industry. But has no one received anything from
previous generations except those who have succeeded to property? Is the
whole difference between the earth as it is, with its clearings and
improvements, its roads Edition: current; Page: [877] and canals, its
towns and manufactories, and the earth as it was when the first human
being set foot on it, of no benefit to any but those who are called the
owners of the soil? Is the capital accumulated by the labour and
abstinence of all former generations, of no advantage to any but those
who have succeeded to the legal ownership of part of it? And have we not
inherited a mass of acquired knowledge, both scientific and empirical,
due to the sagacity and industry of those who preceded us, the benefits
of which are the common wealth of all? Those who are born to the
ownership of property have, in addition to these common benefits, a
separate inheritance, and to this difference it is right that advertence
should be had in regulating taxation. fIt belongs to the general
financial system of the country to takef due account of this principle,
and I have indicated, as in my opinion a proper mode of taking account
of it, a considerable tax on legacies and inheritances. Let it be
determined directly and openly what is due from property to the state,
and from the state to property, and let the institutions of the state be
regulated accordinglyg. Whatever is the fitting contribution from
property to the general expenses of the state, in the same and in no
greater proportion should it contribute towards either the interest or
the repayment of the national debt.

This, however, if admitted, is fatal to any scheme for the extinction of
the debt by a general assessment on the community. Persons of property
could pay their share of the amount by a sacrifice of property, and have
the same net income as before; but if those who have no accumulations,
but only incomes, were required to make up by a single payment the
equivalent of the annual charge laid on them by the taxes maintained to
pay the interest of the debt, they could only do so by incurring a
private debt equal to their share of the public debt; while, from the
insufficiency, in most cases, of the security which they could give, the
interest would amount to a much larger annual sum than their share of
that now paid by the state. Besides, a collective debt defrayed by
taxes, has over the same debt parcelled out among individuals, the
immense advantage, that it is virtually a mutual insurance among the
contributors. If the fortune of a contributor diminishes, his taxes
diminish; if he is ruined, they cease altogether, and his portion of the
debt is wholly transferred to the solvent members of the community. If
it were laid on him as a private obligation, he would still be liable to
it even when penniless.

When the state possesses property, in land or otherwise, which there are
not strong reasons of public utility for its retaining at its disposal,
this Edition: current; Page: [878] should be employed, as far as it will
go, in extinguishing debt. Any casual gain, or godsend, is naturally
devoted to the same purpose. Beyond this, the only mode which is both
just and feasible, of extinguishing or reducing a national debt, is by
means of a surplus revenue.

§ 3. [In what cases it is desirable to maintain a surplus revenue for
the redemption of debt] The desirableness, per se, of maintaining a
surplus for this purpose, does not, I think, admit of a doubt. We
sometimes, indeed, hear it said that the amount should rather be left to
“fructify in the pockets of the people.” This is a good argument, as far
as it goes, against levying taxes unnecessarily for purposes of
unproductive expenditure, but not against paying off a national debt.
For, what is meant by the word fructify? If it means anything, it means
productive employment; and as an argument against taxation, we must
understand it to assert, that if the amount were left with the people
they would save it, and convert it into capital. It is probable, indeed,
that they would save a part, but extremely improbable that they would
save the whole: while if taken by taxation, and employed in paying off
debt, the whole is saved, and made productive. To the fundholder who
receives the payment it is already capital, not revenue, and he will
make it “fructify,” that it may continue to afford him an income. The
objection, therefore, is not only groundless, but the real argument is
on the other side: the amount is much more certain of fructifying if it
is anota “left in the pockets of the people.”

It is not, however, advisable in all cases to maintain a surplus revenue
for the extinction of debt. The advantage of paying off the national
debt of Great Britain, for instance, is that it would enable us to get
rid of the worse half of our btaxation. But of this worse half some
portions must be worse than others, and to get rid of those would be a
greater benefit proportionally than to get rid of the rest. If
renouncing a surplus revenue would enable us to dispense with a tax, we
ought to consider the very worst of all our taxes as precisely the one
which we are keeping up for the sake of ultimately abolishing taxes not
so bad as itself. In a country advancing in wealth, whose increasing
revenue gives it the power of ridding itself from time to time of the
most inconvenient portions of its taxation, I conceive that the increase
of revenue should rather be disposed of by taking off taxes, than by
liquidating debt, as long as any very objectionable imposts remain. In
the present state of England, therefore, I hold it to be good policy in
the government, when it has a surplus of an apparently permanent
character, to take off taxes, provided these are rightly selected. Even
when no taxes remain but such as are not unfit to form part of a
permanent system, it is wise to continue the same policy by experimental
reductions Edition: current; Page: [879] of those taxes, until the point
is discovered at which a given amount of revenue can be raised with the
smallest pressure on the contributors. After this, such surplus revenue
as might arise from any further increase of the produce of the taxes,
should not, I conceive, be remitted, but applied to the redemption of
debt. Eventually, it might be expedient to appropriate the entire
produce of particular taxes to this purpose; since there would be more
assurance that the liquidation would be persisted in, if the fund
destined to it were kept apart, and not blended with the general
revenues of the state. The csuccession dutiesc would be peculiarly
suited to such a purpose, since taxes paid as they are, out of capital,
would be better employed in reimbursing capital than in defraying
current expenditure. If this separate appropriation were made, any
surplus afterwards arising from the increasing produce of the other
taxes, and from the saving of interest on the successive portions of
debt paid off, might form a ground for dad remission of taxation.

It has been contended that some amount of national debt is desirable,
and almost indispensable, as an investment for the savings of the poorer
or more inexperienced part of the community. Its convenience in that
respect is undeniable; but (besides that the progress of industry is
gradually affording other modes of investment almost as safe and
untroublesome, such as the shares or obligations of great public
companies) the only real superiority of an investment in the funds
consists in the national guarantee, and this could be afforded by other
means than that of a public debt, involving compulsory taxation. One
mode which would answer the purpose, would be a national bank of deposit
and discount, with ramifications throughout the country; which might
receive any money confided to it, and either fund it at a fixed rate of
interest, or allow interest on a floating balance, like the joint stock
banks; the interest given being of course lower than the rate at which
individuals can borrow, in proportion to the greater security of a
government investment; and the expenses of the establishment being
defrayed by the difference between the interest which the bank would
pay, and that which it would obtain, by lending its deposits on
mercantile, landed, or other security. There are no insuperable
objections in principle, enor, I should think,e in practice, to an
institution of this sort, as a means of supplying the same convenient
mode of investment now afforded by the public funds. It would constitute
the state a great insurance company, to insure that part of the
community who live on the interest of their property, against the risk
of losing it by the bankruptcy of those to whom they might otherwise be
under the necessity of confiding it.

Edition: current; Page: [880]


CHAPTER VIII: Of the Ordinary Functions of Government, Considered as to Their Economical Effects

§ 1. [Effects of imperfect security of person and property] Before we
discuss the line of demarcation between the things with which government
should, and those with which they should not, directly interfere, it is
necessary to consider the economical effects, whether of a bad or of a
good complexion, arising from the manner in which they acquit themselves
of the duties which devolve on them in all societies, and which no one
denies to be incumbent on them.

The first of these is the protection of person and property. There is no
need to expatiate on the influence exercised over the economical
interests of society by the degree of completeness with which this duty
of government is performed. Insecurity of person and property, is as
much as to say, uncertainty of the connexion between all human exertions
or sacrifice, and the attainment of the ends for the sake of which they
are undergone. It means, uncertainty whether they who sow shall reap,
whether they who produce shall consume, and they who spare to-day shall
enjoy to-morrow. It means, not only that labour and frugality are not
the road to acquisition, but that violence is. When person and property
are to a certain degree insecure, all the possessions of the weak are at
the mercy of the strong. No one can keep what he has produced, unless he
is more capable of defending it, than others who give no part of their
time and exertions to useful industry are of taking it from him. The
productive classes, therefore, when the insecurity surpasses a certain
point, being unequal to their own protection against the predatory
population, are obliged to place themselves individually in a state of
dependence on some member of the predatory class, that it may be his
interest to shield them from all depredation except his own. In this
manner, in the Middle Ages, allodial property generally became feudal,
and numbers of the poorer freemen voluntarily made themselves and their
posterity serfs of some military lord.

Edition: current; Page: [881]
Nevertheless, in attaching to this great requisite, security of person
and property, the importance which is justly due to it, we must not
forget that even for economical purposes there are other things quite as
indispensable, the presence of which will often make up for a very
considerable degree of imperfection in the protective arrangements of
government. As was observed in a previous chapter,* the free cities of
Italy, Flanders, and the Hanseatic league, were habitually in a state of
such internal turbulence, varied by such destructive external wars, that
person and property enjoyed very imperfect protection; yet during
several centuries they increased rapidly in wealth and prosperity,
brought many of the industrial arts to a high degree of advancement,
carried on distant and dangerous voyages of exploration and commerce
with extraordinary success, became an overmatch in power for the
greatest feudal lords, and could defend themselves even against the
sovereigns of Europe: because in the midst of turmoil and violence, the
citizens of those towns enjoyed a certain rude freedom, under conditions
of union and co-operation, which, taken together, made them a brave,
energetic, and high-spirited people, and fostered a great amount of
public spirit and patriotism. The prosperity of these and other free
states in a lawless age, shows that a certain degree of insecurity, in
some combinations of circumstances, has good as well as bad effects, by
making energy and practical ability the conditions of safety. Insecurity
paralyzes, only when it is such in nature and in degree, that no energy
of which mankind in general are capable, affords any tolerable means of
self-protection. And this is a main reason why oppression by the
government, whose power is generally irresistible by any efforts that
can be made by individuals, has so much more baneful an effect on the
springs of national prosperity, than almost any degree of lawlessness
and turbulence under free institutions. Nations have acquired some
wealth, and made some progress in improvement, in states of social union
so imperfect as to border on anarchy: but no countries in which the
people were aexposed without limita to arbitrary exactions from the
officers of government, ever yet continued to have industry or wealth. A
few generations of such a government never fail to extinguish both. Some
of the fairest, and once the most prosperous, regions of the earth,
have, under the Roman and afterwards under the Turkish dominion, been
reduced to a desert, solely by that cause. I say solely, because they
would have recovered with the utmost rapidity, as countries always do,
from the devastations of war, or any other temporary calamities.
Difficulties and hardships are often but an incentive to exertion: what
is fatal to it, is the belief that it will not be suffered to produce
its fruits.

Edition: current; Page: [882]
§ 2. [Effects of over-taxation] Simple over-taxation by government,
though a great evil, is not comparable in the economical part of its
mischiefs to exactions much more moderate in amount, awhich either
subject the contributor to the arbitrary mandate of government officers,
or are so laid on as to place skill, industry, and frugality at a
disadvantage. The burthen of taxation in our own country is very great,
yet as every one knows its limit, and is seldom made to pay more than he
expects and calculates on, and as the modes of taxation are not of such
a kind as much to impair the motives to industry and economy, the
sources of prosperity are little diminished by the pressure of taxation;
they may even, as some think, be increased, by the extra exertions made
to compensate for the pressure of the taxes. But in the barbarous
despotisms of many countries of the East, where taxation consists in
fastening upon those who have succeeded in acquiring something, in order
to confiscate it, unless the possessor buys its release by submitting to
give some large sum as a compromise, we cannot expect to find voluntary
industry, or wealth derived from any source but plunder. And even in
comparatively civilized countries, bad modes of raising a revenue have
had effects similar in kind, though in an inferior degree. French
writers before the Revolution represented the taille as a main cause of
the backward state of agriculture, and of the wretched condition of the
rural population; not from its amount, but because, being proportioned
to the visible capital of the cultivator, it gave him a motive for
appearing poor, which sufficed to turn the scale in favour of indolence.
The arbitrary powers also of fiscal officers, of intendants and
subdélégués, were more destructive of prosperity than a far larger
amount of exactions, because they destroyed security: there was a marked
superiority in the condition of the pays d’états, which were exempt from
this scourge. The universal venality ascribed to Russian functionaries,
must be an immense drag on the capabilities of economical improvement
possessed so abundantly by the Russian empire: since the emoluments of
public officers must depend on the success with which they can multiply
vexations, for the purpose of being bought off by bribes.

Yet mere excess of taxation, even when not aggravated by uncertainty,
is, independently of its injustice, a serious economical evil. It may be
carried so far as to discourage industry by insufficiency of reward.
Very long before it reaches this point, it prevents or greatly checks
accumulation, or causes the capital accumulated to be sent for
investment to foreign countries. Taxes which fall on profits, even
though that kind of income may not pay more than its just share,
necessarily diminish the motive to any saving, except bfor investment in
foreign countries where profits are higher. Holland, for example, seems
to have long cagoc reached the practical Edition: current; Page: [883]
minimum of profits: already in the last century her wealthy capitalists
had a great part of their fortunes invested in the loans and joint-stock
speculations of other countries: and this low rate of profit is ascribed
to the heavy taxation, which had been in some measure forced on her by
the circumstances of her position and history. The taxes indeed, besides
their great amount, were many of them on necessaries, a kind of tax
peculiarly injurious to industry and accumulation. But when the
aggregate amount of taxation is very great, it is inevitable that
recourse must be had for part of it to taxes of an objectionable
character. And any taxes on consumption, when heavy, even if not
operating on profits, have something of the same deffect, by driving
persons of moderate means to live abroad, often taking their capital
with them. Although I by no means join with those political economists
who think no state of national existence desirable in which there is not
a rapid increase of wealth, I cannot overlook the many disadvantages to
an independent nation from being brought prematurely to a stationary
state, while the neighbouring countries continue advancing.

§ 3. [Effects of imperfection in the system of the laws, and in the
administration of justice] The subject of protection to person and
property, considered as afforded by agovernment, ramifies widely, into a
number of indirect channels. It embraces, for example, the whole subject
of the perfection or inefficiency of the means provided for the
ascertainment of rights and the redress of injuries. Persons and
property cannot be considered secure where the administration of justice
is imperfect, either from defect of integrity or capacity in the
tribunals, or because the delay, vexation, and expense accompanying
their operation impose a heavy tax on those who appeal to them, and make
it preferable to submit to any endurable amount of the evils which they
are designed to remedy. In England there is no fault to be found with
the administration of justice, bin point of pecuniary integrityb; a
result which the progress of social improvement may also be supposed to
have brought about in several other nations of Europe. But legal and
judicial imperfections of other kinds are abundant; and, in England
especially, are a large abatement from the value of the services which
the government renders back to the people in return for our enormous
taxation. In the first place, the incognoscibility (as Bentham termed
it) of the law, and its extreme uncertainty, even to those who best know
it, render a resort to the tribunals often necessary for obtaining
justice, when, there being no dispute as to facts, no litigation ought
to be required. In the next place, the procedure of the tribunals is so
replete with delay, vexation, and expense, that the price Edition:
current; Page: [884] at which justice is at last obtained is an evil
outweighing a very considerable amount of injustice; and the wrong side,
even that which the law considers such, has many chances of gaining its
point, through the abandonment of litigation by the other party for want
of funds, or through a compromise in which a sacrifice is made of just
rights to terminate the suit, or through some technical quirk, whereby a
decision is obtained on some other ground than the merits. This last
detestable incident often happens without blame to the judge, under a
system of law, of which a great part rests on no rational principles
adapted to the present state of society, but was originally founded
partly on a kind of whims and conceits, and partly on the principles and
incidents of feudal tenure, (which now survive only as legal fictions;)
and has only been very imperfectly adapted, as cases arose, to the
changes which had taken place in society. Of all parts of the English
legal system, the Court of Chancery, which has the best substantive law,
chas beenc incomparably the worst as to delay, vexation, and expense;
and this is the only tribunal for most of the classes of cases which are
in their nature the most complicated, such as cases of partnership, and
the great range and variety of cases which come under the denomination
of trust. dThe recent reforms in this Court have abated the mischief,
but are still far from having removed it.d

Fortunately for the prosperity of England, the greater part of the
mercantile law is comparatively modern, and was made by the tribunals,
by the simple process of recognising and giving force of law to the
usages which, from motives of convenience, had grown up among merchants
themselves: so that this part of the law, at least, was substantially
made by those who were most interested in its goodness: while the
defects of the tribunals have been the less practically pernicious in
reference to commercial transactions, because the importance of credit,
which depends on character, renders the restraints of opinion (though,
as daily experience proves, an insufficient) yet a very powerful,
protection against those forms of mercantile dishonesty which are
generally recognised as such.

The imperfections of the law, both in its substance and in its
procedure, fall heaviest upon the interests connected with what is
technically called real property; in the general language of European
jurisprudence, immoveable property. With respect to all this portion of
the wealth of the community, the law fails egregiously in the protection
which it undertakes to provide. It fails, first, by the uncertainty, and
the maze of technicalities, which make it impossible for any one, at
however great an expense, to possess a title to land which he can
positively know to be unassailable. It fails, secondly, in omitting to
provide due evidence of transactions, by Edition: current; Page: [885] a
proper registration of legal documents. It fails, thirdly, by creating a
necessity for operose and expensive instruments and formalities
(independently of fiscal burthens) on occasion of the purchase and sale,
or even the lease or mortgage, of immoveable property. And, fourthly, it
fails by the intolerable expense and delay of law proceedings, in almost
all cases in which real property is concerned. There is no doubt that
the greatest sufferers by the defects of the higher courts of civil law
are the landowners. Legal expenses, either those of actual litigation,
or of the preparation of legal instruments, form, I apprehend, no
inconsiderable item in the annual expenditure of most persons of large
landed property, and the saleable value of their land is greatly
impaired, by the difficulty of giving to the buyer complete confidence
in the title; independently of the legal expenses which accompany the
transfer. Yet the landowners, though they have been masters of the
legislation of England, to say the least since 1688, have never made a
single move in the direction of law reform, and have been strenuous
opponents of some of the improvements of which they would more
particularly reap the benefit; especially that great one of a
registration of contracts affecting land, which when proposed by a
Commission of eminent real property lawyers, and introduced into the
House of Commons by Lord Campbell, was so offensive to the general body
of landlords, and was rejected by so large a majority, as to have elonge
discouraged any repetition of the attempt.* This irrational hostility to
improvement, in a case in which their own interest would be the most
benefited by it, must be ascribed to an intense timidity on the subject
of their titles, generated by the defects of the very law which they
refuse to alter; and to a conscious ignorance, and incapacity of
judgment, on all legal subjects, which makes them helplessly defer to
the opinion of their professional advisers, heedless of the fact that
every imperfection of the law, in proportion as it is burthensome to
them, brings gain to the lawyer.

In so far as the defects of legal arrangements are a mere burthen on the
landowner, they do not much affect the sources of production; but the
uncertainty of the ftitlef under which land is held, must often act as a
great discouragement to the expenditure of capital in its improvement;
and the expense of making transfers, operates to prevent land from
coming into the hands of those who would use it to most advantage; often
amounting, in the case of small purchases, to more than the price of the
land, and tantamount, therefore, to a prohibition of the purchase and
sale of land in small Edition: current; Page: [886] portions, unless in
exceptional circumstances. Such purchases, however, are almost
everywhere extremely desirable, there being hardly any country in which
landed property is not either too much or too little subdivided,
requiring either that great estates should be broken down, or that small
ones should be bought up and consolidated. To make land as easily
transferable as stock, would be one of the greatest economical
improvements which could be bestowed on a country; and has been shown,
again and again, to have no insuperable difficulty attending it.

Besides the excellences or defects that belong to the law and judicature
of a country as a system of arrangements for attaining direct practical
ends, much also depends, even in an economical point of view, upon the
moral influence of the law. Enough has been said in a former place,* on
the degree in which both the industrial and all other combined
operations of mankind depend for efficiency on their being able to rely
on one another for probity and fidelity to engagements; from which we
see how greatly even the economical prosperity of a country is liable to
be affected, by anything in its institutions by which either integrity
and trustworthiness, or the contrary qualities, are encouraged. The law
everywhere ostensibly favours at least pecuniary honesty and the faith
of contracts; but if it affords facilities for evading those
obligations, by trick and chicanery, or by the unscrupulous use of
riches in instituting unjust or resisting just litigation; if there are
ways and means by which persons may attain the ends of roguery, under
the apparent sanction of the law; to that extent the law is
demoralizing, even in regard to pecuniary integrity. And such cases are,
unfortunately, frequent under the English system. If, again, the law, by
a misplaced indulgence, protects idleness or prodigality against their
natural consequences, or dismisses crime with inadequate penalties, the
effect, both on the prudential and on the social virtues, gis
unfavourableg. When the law, by its own dispensations and injunctions,
establishes injustice between individual and individual; as all laws do
which recognise any form of slavery, as the laws of all countries do,
though not all in the same degree, in respect to the family relations;
and as the laws of many countries do, though in still more unequal
degrees, as between rich and poor; the effect on the moral sentiments of
the people is still more disastrous. But these subjects introduce
considerations so much larger and deeper than those of political
economy, that I only advert to them in order not to pass wholly
unnoticed, things superior in importance to those of which I treat.

Edition: current; Page: [887]


CHAPTER IX: The Same Subject Continued

§ 1. [Laws of Inheritance] Having spoken thus far of the effects
produced by the excellences or defects of the general system of the law,
I shall now touch upon those resulting from the special character of
particular parts of it. As a selection must be made, I shall confine
myself to a few leading topics. The portions of the civil law of a
country which are of most importance economically (next to those which
determine the status of the labourer, as slave, serf, or free), are
those relating to the two subjects of Inheritance and Contract. Of the
laws relating to contract, none are more important economically, than
the laws of partnership, and those of insolvency. It happens that on all
these three points, there is just ground for condemning some of the
provisions of the English law.a

With regard to Inheritance, I have, in an early bchapterb, considered
the general principles of the subject, and suggested what appear to me
to be, cputting all prejudice apart, the best dispositions which the law
could adopt. Freedom of bequest as the general rule, but limited by two
things: first, that if there are descendants, who, being unable to
provide for themselves, would become burthensome to the state, the
equivalent of whatever the state would accord to them should be reserved
from the property for their benefit; and secondly, that no one person
should be permitted to acquire, by inheritance, more than the amount of
a moderate independence. In case of intestacy, the whole property to
escheat to the state: which should be bound to make a just and
reasonable provision for descendants, that is, such a provision as the
parent or ancestor ought to have made, their circumstances, capacities,
and mode of bringing up being considered.

The laws of inheritance, however, have probably several phases of
improvement to go through, before ideas so far removed from present
modes of thinking will be taken into serious consideration: and as,
among the recognised modes of determining the succession to property,
some must be better and others worse, it is necessary to consider which
of them Edition: current; Page: [888] deserves the preference. As an
intermediate course, therefore, dI would recommend the extension to all
property, of the present English law of inheritance affecting personal
property (freedom of bequest, and in case of intestacy, equal division):
except that no rights should be acknowledged in collaterals, and that
the property of those who have neither descendants nor ascendants, and
make no will, should escheat to the state.

The laws of existing nations deviate from these maxims in two opposite
ways. In England, and eine most of the countries fwheref the influence
of feudality is still felt in the laws, one of the objects aimed at in
respect to land and other immoveable property, is to keep it together in
large masses: accordingly, in cases of intestacy, it passes, generally
speaking (for the local custom of ga fewg places is different),
exclusively to the eldest son. And though the rule of primogeniture is
not binding on testators, who in England have nominally the power of
bequeathing their property as they please, any hproprietor may so
exercise this power as to deprive his iimmediate successori of it, by
entailing the property on one particular line of his descendants: which,
besides preventing it from passing by inheritance in any other than the
prescribed manner, is attended with the incidental consequence of
precluding it from being sold; since each successive possessor, having
only a life interest in the property, cannot alienate it for a longer
period than his own life. In fsomef other countries, such as France, the
law, on the contrary, compels division of inheritances; not only, in
case of intestacy, sharing the property, both real and personal, equally
among all the children, or (if there are no children) among all
relatives in the same degree of propinquity; but also not recognising
any power of bequest, or recognising it over only a limited portion of
the property, the remainder being subjected to compulsory equal
division.

Neither of these systems, I apprehend, was introduced, or is kperhapsk
maintained, in the countries where it exists, from any general
considerations of justice, or any foresight of economical consequences,
but chiefly from political motives; in the one case to keep up large
hereditary fortunes, and a landed aristocracy; in the other, to break
these down, and prevent their resurrection. The first object, as an aim
of national policy, I conceive to be eminently undesirable: lwith regard
to the secondl, I have pointed out what seems to me a better mode of
attaining it. The merit, or demerit, however, of either purpose, belongs
to the general science of politics, not Edition: current; Page: [889] to
the limited department of that science which mis here treated ofm. Each
of the two systems is a real and efficient instrument for the purpose
intended by it; but each, as it appears to me, achieves that purpose at
the cost of much mischief.

§ 2. [Law and Custom of Primogeniture] There are two arguments of an
economical character, which are urged in favour of primogeniture. One
is, the stimulus applied to the industry and ambition of younger
children, by leaving them to be the architects of their own fortunes.
This argument was put by Dr. Johnson in a manner more forcible than
complimentary to an hereditary aristocracy, when he said, by way of
recommendation of primogeniture, that it “makes but one fool in a
family.” It is curious that a defender of aristocratic institutions
should be the person to assert that to inherit such a fortune as takes
away any necessity for exertion, is generally fatal to activity and
strength of mind: in the present state of education, however, the
proposition, with some allowance for exaggeration, may be admitted to be
true. But whatever force there is in the argument, counts in favour of
limiting the eldest, as well as all the other children, to a mere
provision, and dispensing with even the “one fool” whom Dr. Johnson was
willing to tolerate. If unearned riches are so pernicious to the
character, one does not see why, in order to withhold the poison from
the junior members of a family, there should be no way but to unite all
their separate potions, and administer them in the largest possible dose
to one selected victim. aIt bcannot beb necessary to inflict this great
evil on the eldest son, for want of knowing what else to do with a large
fortune.a

Some writers, however, look upon the effect of primogeniture in
stimulating industry, as depending, not so much on the poverty of the
younger children, as on the contrast between that poverty and the riches
of the elder; thinking it indispensable to the activity and energy of
the hive, that there should be a huge drone here and there, to impress
the working bees with a due sense of the advantages of honey. “Their
inferiority in point of wealth,” says Mr. M‘Culloch, speaking of the
younger children, “and their desire to escape from this lower cstationc,
and to attain to the same level with their elder brothers, inspires them
with an energy and vigour they could not otherwise feel. But the
advantage of preserving large estates from being frittered down by a
scheme of equal division, is not limited to its Edition: current; Page:
[890] influence over the younger children of their owners. It raises
universally the standard of competence, and gives new force to the
springs which set industry in motion. The manner of living among the
great landlords is that in which every one is ambitious of being able to
indulge; and their habits of expense, though sometimes injurious to
themselves, act as powerful incentives to the ingenuity and enterprise
of the other classes, who never think their fortunes sufficiently ample,
unless they will enable them to emulate the splendour of the richest
landlords; so that the custom of primogeniture seems to render all
classes more industrious, and to augment at the same time, the mass of
wealth and the scale of enjoyment.”*

The portion of truth, I dcan hardlyd say contained in these
observations, but recalled by them, I apprehend to be, that a state of
complete equality of fortunes would not be favourable to eactive
exertion for the increase of wealthe. Speaking of the mass, it is as
true of wealth as of most other distinctions—of talent, knowledge,
virtue—that those who already have, or think they have, as much of it as
ftheir neighbours, will seldom gexert themselves to acquire more. But it
is not therefore necessary that society should provide a set of persons
with large fortunes, to fulfil the social duty of standing to be looked
at, with envy and admiration, by the aspiring poor. The fortunes which
people have acquired for themselves, answer the purpose quite as well,
indeed much better; since a person is more powerfully stimulated by the
example of somebody who has earned a fortune, than by the mere sight of
somebody who possesses one; and the former is necessarily an example of
prudence and frugality as well as industry, while the latter much
oftener sets an example of profuse expense, which spreads, with
pernicious effect, to the very class on whom the sight of riches is
supposed to have so beneficial an influence, namely, those whose
weakness of mind, and taste for ostentation, makes “the splendour of the
richest landlords” attract them with the most potent spell. In America
there are few or no hhereditary fortunes; yet industrial energy, and the
ardour of accumulation, are not supposed to be particularly backward in
that part of the world. When a country has once fairly entered into the
industrial career, which is the iprincipali occupation of the modern, as
war was that of the ancient and mediæval world, the desire of
acquisition by industry needs no factitious stimulus: the advantages
naturally inherent in riches, and the character they assume of a test by
which talent and success in life are Edition: current; Page: [891]
habitually measured, are an ample security for their being pursued with
sufficient intensity and zeal. As to the deeper consideration, that the
diffusion of wealth, and not its concentration, is desirable, and that
the jmorej wholesome state of society is not that in which immense
fortunes are possessed by a few and coveted by all, but that in which
the greatest possible numbers possess and are contented with a moderate
competency, which all may hope to acquire: I refer to it in this place,
only to show, how widely separated, on social questions, is the entire
mode of thought of the kdefendersk of primogeniture, from that which is
partially promulgated in the present treatise.

The other economical argument in favour of primogeniture, has lspeciall
reference to landed property. It is contended that the habit of dividing
inheritances equally, or with an approach to equality, among children,
promotes the subdivision of land into mportionsm too small to admit of
being cultivated in an advantageous manner. This argument, eternally
reproduced, has again and again been refuted by English and Continental
writers. It proceeds on a supposition entirely at variance with that on
which all the theorems of political economy are grounded. It assumes
that mankind in general will habitually act in a manner opposed to their
immediate and obvious pecuniary interest. For the division of the
inheritance does not necessarily imply division of the land; which may
be held in common, as is not unfrequently the case in France and
Belgium; or may become the property of one of the coheirs, being charged
with the shares of the nothersn by oway of mortgage; or they may sell it
outright, and divide the proceeds. When the division of the land would
diminish its productive power, it is the direct interest of the heirs to
adopt some one of these arrangements. Supposing, however, what the
argument assumes, that either from legal difficulties or from their own
stupidity and barbarism, they would not, if left to themselves, obey the
dictates of this obvious interest, but would insist upon cutting up the
land bodily into equal parcels, with the effect of impoverishing
themselves; this would be an objection to a law such as exists in
France, of compulsory division, but can be no reason why testators
should be discouraged from exercising the right of bequest in general
conformity to the rule of equality, since it would always be in their
power to provide that the division of the inheritance should take place
without dividing the land itself. That the attempts of the advocates of
primogeniture to make out a case by facts against the custom of equal
division, are equally abortive, has been shown in a former pplacep. In
all countries, or parts of countries, in which Edition: current; Page:
[892] the division of inheritance is accompanied by small holdings, it
is because small holdings are the general system of the country, even on
the estates of the great proprietors.

Unless a strong case of social utility can be made out for
primogeniture, it stands sufficiently condemned by the general
principles of justice; being a broad distinction in the treatment of one
person and of another, grounded solely on an accident. There is no need,
therefore, to make out any case of economical evil against
primogeniture. Such a case, however, and a very strong one, may be made.
It is a natural effect of primogeniture to make the landlords a needy
class. The object of the institution, or custom, is to keep the land
together in large masses, and this it commonly accomplishes; but the
legal proprietor of a large domain is not necessarily the bonâ fide
owner of the whole income which it yields. It is usually charged, in
each generation, with provisions for the other children. It is often
charged still more heavily by the imprudent expenditure of the
proprietor. Great landowners are generally improvident in their
expenses; they live up to their incomes when at the highest, and if any
change of circumstances diminishes their resources, some time elapses
before they make up their minds to retrench. Spendthrifts in other
classes are ruined, and disappear from society; but the spendthrift
landlord usually holds fast to his land, even when he has become a mere
receiver of its rents for the benefit of creditors. The same desire to
keep up the “splendour” of the family, which gives rise to the custom of
primogeniture, indisposes the qownerq to sell a part in order to set
free the remainder; their apparent are therefore habitually greater than
their real means, and they are under a perpetual temptation to
proportion their expenditure to the former rather than to the latter.
From such causes as these, in almost all countries of great landowners,
the majority of landed estates are deeply mortgaged; and instead of
having capital to spare for improvements, it requires all the increased
value of land, caused by rther rapid increase of the wealth and
population of the country, to preserve the class from being
impoverished.

§ 3. [Entails] To avert this impoverishment, recourse was had to the
contrivance of entails, whereby the order of succession was irrevocably
fixed, and each holder, having only a life interest, was unable to
burthen his successor. The land thus passing, free from debt, into the
possession of the heir, the family could not be ruined by the
improvidence of its existing representative. The economical evils
arising from this disposition of property were partly of the same kind,
partly different, but on the whole greater, than those arising from
primogeniture. The possessor could not now ruin his successors, but he
could still ruin himself: he was not at all Edition: current; Page:
[893] more likely than in the former case to have the means necessary
for improving the property: while, even if he had, he was still less
likely to employ them for that purpose, when the benefit was to accrue
to a person whom the entail made independent of him, while he had
probably younger children to provide for, in whose favour he could not
now charge the estate. While thus disabled from being himself an
improver, neither could he sell the estate to somebody who would; since
entail precludes alienation. In general he has even been unable to grant
leases beyond the term of his own life; “for,” says Blackstone, “if such
leases had been valid, then, under cover of long leases, the issue might
have been virtually disinherited;”[*] and it has been necessary in Great
Britain to relax, by statute, the rigour of entails, in order to allow
either of long leases, or of the execution of improvements at the
expense of the estate. It may be added that the heir of entail, being
assured of succeeding to the family property, however undeserving of it,
and being aware of this from his earliest years, has much more than the
ordinary chances of growing up idle, dissipated, and profligate.

In England, the power of entail is more limited by law, than in Scotland
and in most other countries where it exists. A landowner can settle his
property upon any number of persons successively who are living at the
time, and upon one unborn person, on whose attaining the age of
twenty-one, the entail expires, and the land becomes his absolute
property. An estate may in this manner be transmitted through a son, or
a son and grandson, living when the deed is executed, to an unborn child
of that grandson. It has been maintained that this power of entail is
not sufficiently extensive to do any mischief: in truth, however, it is
much larger than it seems. Entails very rarely expire; the first heir of
entail, when of age, joins with the existing possessor in resettling the
estate, so as to prolong the entail for a further term. Large
properties, therefore, are rarely free for any considerable period, from
the restraints of a strict settlement; athough the mischief is in one
respect mitigated, since in the renewal of the settlement for one more
generation, the estate is usually charged with a bprovisionb for younger
childrena.

In an economical point of view, the best system of landed property is
that in which land is most completely an object of commerce; passing
readily from hand to hand when a buyer can be found to whom it is worth
while to offer a greater sum for the land, than the value of the income
Edition: current; Page: [894] drawn from it by its existing possessor.
This of course is not meant of ornamental property, which is a source of
expense, not profit; but only of land employed for industrial uses, and
held for the sake of the income which it affords. Whatever facilitates
the sale of land, tends to make it a more productive instrument cofc the
community at large; whatever prevents or restricts its sale, subtracts
from its usefulness. Now, not only has entail this effect, but
primogeniture also. The desire to keep land together in large masses,
from other motives than that of promoting its productiveness, often
prevents changes and alienations which would increase its efficiency as
an instrument.

§ 4. [Law of compulsory equal division of inheritances] On the other
hand, a law which, like the French, restricts the power of bequest to a
narrow compass, and compels the equal division of the whole or the
greater part of the property among the children, seems to me, though on
different grounds, also very seriously objectionable. The only reason
for recognising in the children any aclaima at all to more than a
provision, sufficient to launch them binb life, and enable them to find
a livelihood, is grounded on the expressed or presumed wish of the
parent; whose claim to dispose of what is actually his cown, cannot be
set aside by any pretensions of others to receive what is not theirs. To
control the rightful owner’s liberty of gift, by creating in the
children a legal right superior to it, is to postpone a real claim to an
imaginary one. To this great and paramount objection to the law,
numerous secondary ones may be added. Desirable as it is that the parent
should treat the children with impartiality, and not make an eldest son
or a favourite, impartial division is not always synonymous with equal
division. Some of the children mayd, without fault of their own, be less
capable than others of providing for themselves: some may, by other
means than their own exertions, be already provided for:d and
impartiality may therefore require that the rule observed should not be
one of equality, but of compensation. Even when equality is ethe object,
there are sometimes better means of attaining it, than the inflexible
rules by which law must necessarily proceed.e If one of the coheirs,
being of a quarrelsome forf litigious disposition, stands upon his
utmost rights, the law cannot make equitable adjustments; it cannot
apportion the property as seems best for Edition: current; Page: [895]
the collective interest of gall concernedg; if there are several parcels
of land, and the heirs cannot agree about their value, the law cannot
give a parcel to each, but every separate parcel must be either put up
to sale or divided: if there is a residence, or a park or
pleasure-ground, which would be destroyed, as such, by subdivision, it
must be sold, hperhaps at a great sacrifice both of money and of
feelingh. But what the law could not do, the parent could. By means of
the liberty of bequest, all these points might be determined according
to reason and the general interest of the persons concerned; and the
spirit of the principle of equal division might be the better observed,
because the testator was emancipated from its letter. Finally, it would
not then be necessary, as under the compulsory system it is, that the
law should interfere authoritatively in the concerns of iindividualsi,
not only on the occurrence of a death, but throughout life, in order to
guard against the attempts of parents to frustrate the legal claims of
their heirs, under colour of gifts and other alienations inter vivos.

In conclusion; all owners of property should, I conceive, have power to
dispose by will of every part of it, but not to determine the person who
should succeed to it after the jdeathj of all who were living when the
will was made. Under what restrictions it should be allowable to
bequeath property to one person for life, with remainder to another
person already in existence, is a question belonging to general
legislation, not to political economy. Such settlements would be no
greater hindrance to alienation than any case of joint ownership, since
the consent of persons actually in existence is all that would be
necessary for any new arrangement respecting the property.

§ 5. [Laws of Partnership] From the subject of Inheritance I now pass to
that of Contracts, and among these, to the important subject of the Laws
of Partnership. How much of good or evil depends upon these laws, and
how important it is that they should be the best possible, is evident to
all who recognise in the extension of the co-operative principle ain the
larger sense of the term,a the great economical necessity of modern
industry. The progress of the productive arts requiring that many sorts
of industrial occupation should be carried on by larger and larger
capitals, the productive power of industry must suffer by whatever
impedes the formation of large capitals through the aggregation of
smaller ones. Capitals of the requisite magnitude belonging to single
owners, do not, in most countries, Edition: current; Page: [896] exist
in the needful abundance, and would be still less numerous if the laws
favoured the diffusion instead of the concentration of property: while
it is most undesirable that all those improved processes, and those
means of efficiency and economy in production, which depend on the
possession of large funds, should be monopolies in the hands of a few
rich individuals, through the difficulties experienced by persons of
moderate or small means in associating their capital. Finally, I must
repeat my conviction, that the industrial economy which divides society
absolutely into two portions, the payers of wages and the receivers of
them, the first counted by thousands and the last by millions, is
neither fit for, nor capable of, indefinite duration: and the
possibility of changing this system for one of combination without
dependence, and unity of interest instead of organized hostility,
depends altogether upon the future developments of the Partnership
principle.

Yet there is scarcely any country whose laws do not throw great, and in
most cases, intentional obstacles in the way of the formation of any
numerous partnership. In England it is already a serious discouragement,
that bdifferences among partners are, practically speaking, only capable
of adjudication by the Court of Chancery: which is often worse than
placing such questions out of the pale of all law; since any one of the
disputant parties, who is either dishonest or litigious, can involve the
others at his pleasure in the cexpense, trouble, and anxiety, which are
the unavoidable accompaniments of a dChancery suit, without their having
the power of freeing themselves from the infliction even by breaking up
the association.* Besides this, it required, until lately, a separate
Act of the legislature before Edition: current; Page: [897] any
joint-stock association could legally constitute itself, and be
empowered to act as one body. By a statute passed ea few years ago, this
necessity is done awayf; but the statute in question is described by
competent authorities as a “mass of confusion,” of which they say that
there “never was such an infliction” on persons entering into
partnershipf.* When a number of persons, whether few or many, freely
desire to unite their funds for a common undertaking, not asking any
peculiar privilege, nor the power to dispossess any one of property, the
law can have no good reason for throwing difficulties in the way of the
realization of the project. On compliance with a few simple conditions
of publicity, any body of persons ought to have the power of
constituting themselves into a joint-stock company, or société en nom
collectif, without asking leave either of any public officer or of
parliamentg. As an association of many partners must practically be
under the management of a few, every facility hought to be afforded to
the body for exercising the necessary control and check over those few,
whether they be themselves members of the association, or merely its
hired servants: and in this point the English system is still at a
lamentable distance from the standard of perfectioni.

§ 6. [Partnership with limited liability. Chartered Companies] Whatever
facilities, however, English law amighta give to associations formed on
the principles of ordinary partnership, there is one sort of joint-stock
association which buntil the year 1855b it absolutely cdisallowedc, and
which dcould only bed called into existence by a special act either of
the legislature or of the crown. I mean, associations with limited
liability.

Associations with limited liability are of two kinds: in one, the
liability of all the partners is limited, in the other that of some of
them only. The first is the société anonyme of the French law, which in
England ehad until latelye no other name than that of “chartered
company:” meaning thereby a joint-stock company whose shareholders, by a
charter from the crown or a special enactment of the legislature,
fstoodf exempted from any liability for the debts of the concern, beyond
the amount of their subscriptions. Edition: current; Page: [898] gThe
other species of limited partnership is that known to the French law
under the name of commandite; of this, which in England is hstillh
unrecognised and illegal, I shall speak presently.

If a number of persons choose to associate for carrying on any operation
of commerce or industry, agreeing among themselves and announcing to
those with whom they deal that the members of the association do not
undertake to be responsible beyond the amount of the subscribed capital;
is there any reason that the law should raise objections to this
proceeding, and should impose on them the unlimited responsibility which
they disclaim? For whose sake? Not for that of the partners themselves;
for it is they whom the limitation of responsibility benefits and
protects. It must therefore be for the sake of third parties; namely,
those who may have transactions with the association, and to whom it may
run in debt beyond what the subscribed capital suffices to pay. But
nobody is obliged to deal with the association: still less is any one
obliged to give it unlimited credit. The class of persons with whom such
associations have dealings are in general perfectly capable of taking
care of themselves, and there seems no reason that the law should be
more careful of their interests than they will themselves be; provided
no false representation is held out, and they are aware from the first
what they have to trust to. The law is warranted in requiring from all
joint-stock associations with limited responsibilities, not only that
the amount of capital on which they profess to carry on business should
either be actually paid up or security given for it (if, indeed, with
complete publicity, such a requirement would be necessary), but also
that such accounts should be kept, accessible to individuals, and if
needful, published to the world, as shall render it possible to
ascertain at any time the existing state of the company’s affairs, and
to learn whether the capital which is the sole security for the
engagements into which they enter, still subsists unimpaired: the
fidelity of such accounts being guarded by sufficient penalties. When
the law has thus afforded to individuals all practicable means of
knowing the circumstances which ought to enter into their prudential
calculations in dealing with the company, there seems no more need for
interfering with individual judgment in this sort of transactions, than
in any other part of the private business of life.

The reason usually urged for such interference is, that the managers of
an association with limited responsibility, not risking their whole
fortunes in the event of loss, while in case of gain they imighti profit
largely, are not sufficiently interested in exercising due
circumspection, and are under the temptation of exposing the funds of
the association to improper hazards. Edition: current; Page: [899] jIt
kis, however, well ascertainedk that associations with unlimited
responsibility, if they have rich shareholders, can obtain, even when
known to be reckless in their transactions, improper credit to an extent
far exceeding what would be given to companies equally ill-conducted
whose creditors had only the subscribed capital to rely on.* To
whichever side the balance of evil inclinesj, it is a consideration of
more importance to the shareholders themselves than to third parties;
since, with proper securities for publicity, the capital of lan
association with limited liabilityl could not be engaged in hazards
beyond those ordinarily incident to the business it carries on, without
the facts being known, and becoming the subject of comments by which the
credit of the body would be likely to be affected in quite as great a
degree as the circumstances would justify. If, under securities for
publicity, it were found in practice that companies, formed on the
principle of unlimited responsibility, mwere more skilfully and more
cautiously managedm, companies with limited liability would be unable to
maintain an equal competition with them; and would therefore rarely be
formed, unless when such limitation was the only condition on which the
necessary amount of capital could be raised: and in that case it would
be very unreasonable to say that their formation ought to be prevented.

It may further be remarked, that although, with equality of capital, a
company of limited liability offers a somewhat less security to those
who deal with it, than one in which every shareholder is responsible
with his whole fortune, yet even the weaker of these two securities is
in some respects stronger than that which an individual capitalist can
afford. In the case of an individual, there is such security as can be
founded on his unlimited liability, but not that derived from publicity
of transactions, or from a known and large amount of paid-up capital.
This topic is well treated in an able paper by M. Coquelin, published in
the Revue des Deux Mondes for July 1843.†

“While third parties who trade with individuals,” says this writer,
“scarcely ever know, except by approximation, and even that most vague
and uncertain, what is the amount of capital responsible for the
performance of contracts made with them, those who trade with a société
anonyme Edition: current; Page: [900] can obtain full information if
they seek it, and perform their operations with a feeling of confidence
that cannot exist in the other case. Again, nothing is easier than for
an individual trader to conceal the extent of his engagements, as no one
can know it certainly but himself. Even his confidential clerk may be
ignorant of it, as the loans he finds himself compelled to make may not
all be of a character to require that they be entered in his day-book.
It is a secret confined to himself; one which transpires rarely, and
always slowly; one which is unveiled only when the catastrophe has
occurred. On the contrary, the société anonyme neither can nor ought to
borrow, without the fact becoming known to all the world—directors,
clerks, shareholders, and the public. Its operations partake in some
respects, of the nature of those of governments. The light of day
penetrates in every direction, and there can be no secrets from those
who seek for information. Thus all is fixed, recorded, known, of the
capital and debts in the case of the société anonyme, while all is
uncertain and unknown in the case of the individual trader. Which of the
two, we would ask the reader, presents the most favourable aspect, or
the surest guarantee, to the view of those who trade with them?

“Again, availing himself of the obscurity in which his affairs are
shrouded, and which he desires to increase, the private trader is
enabled, so long as his business appears prosperous, to produce
impressions in regard to his means far exceeding the reality, and thus
to establish a credit not justified by those means. When losses occur,
and he sees himself threatened with bankruptcy, the world is still
ignorant of his condition, and he finds himself enabled to contract
debts far beyond the possibility of payment. The fatal day arrives, and
the creditors find a debt much greater than had been anticipated, while
the means of payment are as much less. Even this is not all. The same
obscurity which has served him so well thus far, when desiring to
magnify his capital and increase his credit, now affords him the
opportunity of placing a part of that capital beyond the reach of his
creditors. It becomes diminished, if not annihilated. It hides itself,
and not even legal remedies, nor the activity of creditors, can bring it
forth from the dark corners in which it is placed. . . . Our readers can
readily determine for themselves if practices of this kind are equally
easy in the case of the société anonyme. We do not doubt that such
things are possible, but we think that they will agree with us that from
its nature, its organization, and the necessary publicity that attends
all its actions, the liability to such occurrences is very greatly
diminished.”

The laws of most countries, England included, have erred in a twofold
manner with regard to joint-stock companies. While they have been most
unreasonably jealous of allowing such associations to exist, especially
with limited responsibility, they have generally neglected the
enforcement of Edition: current; Page: [901] publicity; the best
security to the public against any danger which might arise from this
description of partnerships; and a security quite as much required in
the case of those associations of the kind in question, which, by an
exception from their general practice, they suffered to exist. Even in
the instance of the Bank of England, which holds a monopoly from the
legislature, and has had partial control over a matter of so much public
interest as the state of the circulating medium, it is only within these
few years that any publicity nhas been enforced; and the publicity was
at first of an extremely incomplete character, though now, for most
practical purposes, probably at length sufficient.

§ 7. [Partnerships in commandite] The other kind of limited partnership
which demands our attention, is that in which the managing partner or
partners are responsible with their whole fortunes for the engagements
of the concern, but have others associated with them who contribute only
definite sums, and are not liable for anything beyond, though they
participate in the profits according to any rule which may be agreed on.
This is called partnership en commandite: and the partners with limited
liability (to whom, by the French law, all interference in the
management of the concern is interdicted) are known by the name
commanditaires. Such partnerships are not aalloweda by English law: bin
all private partnerships,b whoever shares in the profits is liable for
the debts, to as plenary an extent as the managing partner.

For such prohibition no csatisfactoryc defence has ever, so far as I am
aware, been made. Even the insufficient reason given against limiting
the responsibility of shareholders in a joint-stock company, does not
apply here; there being no diminution of the motives to circumspect
management, since all who take any part in the direction of the concern
are liable with their whole fortunes. To third parties, again, the
security is improved by the existence of commandite; since the amount
subscribed by commanditaires is all of it available to creditors, the
commanditaires losing their whole investment before any creditor can
lose anything; while, if instead of becoming partners to that amount,
they had lent the sum at an interest equal to the profit they derived
from it, they would have shared with the other creditors in the residue
of the estate, diminishing pro rata the dividend obtained by all. While
the practice of commandite thus conduces to the interest of creditors,
it is often highly desirable for the contracting parties themselves. The
managers are enabled to obtain the aid of a much greater amount of
capital than they could borrow on their own security; and persons are
induced to aid useful undertakings, by embarking limited Edition:
current; Page: [902] portions of capital in them, when they would not,
and often could not prudently, have risked their whole fortunes on the
chances of the enterprise.

It may perhaps be thought that where due facilities are afforded to
joint-stock companies, commandite partnerships are not required. But
there are classes of cases to which the commandite principle must always
be better adapted than the joint-stock principle. “Suppose,” says M.
Coquelin, “an inventor seeking for a capital to carry his invention into
practice. To obtain the aid of capitalists, he must offer them a share
of the anticipated benefit; they must associate themselves with him in
the chances of its success. In such a case, which of the forms would he
select? Not a common partnership, certainly;” for various reasons, and
especially dthe extreme difficulty of findingd a partner with capital,
willing to risk his whole fortune on the success of ethee invention.*
“Neither would he select the société anonyme,” or any other form of
joint-stock company, “in which he might be superseded as manager. He
would stand, in such an association, on no better footing than any other
shareholder, and he might be lost in the crowd; whereas, the association
existing, as it were, by and for him, the management would appear to
belong to him as a matter of right. Cases occur in which a merchant or a
manufacturer, without being precisely an inventor, has undeniable claims
to the management of an undertaking, Edition: current; Page: [903] from
the possession of qualities peculiarly calculated to promote its
success. So great, indeed,” continues M. Coquelin, “is the necessity, in
many cases, for the limited partnership, that it is difficult to
conceive how we could dispense with or replace it:”[*] and in reference
to his own country he is probably in the right.

Where there is so great a readiness as in England, on the part of the
public, to form joint-stock associations, even without the encouragement
of a limitation of responsibility; commandite partnership, though its
prohibition is in principle quite indefensible, cannot be deemed to be,
in a merely economical point of view, of the imperative necessity which
M. Coquelin ascribes to it. Yet the inconveniences are not small, which
arise indirectly from those provisions of the law by which every one who
shares in the profits of a concern is subject to the full liabilities of
an unlimited partnership. It is impossible to say how many or what
useful modes of combination are rendered impracticable by this state of
the law. It is sufficient for its condemnation that, unless in some way
relaxed, it is inconsistent with fthe payment of wages in part by a
percentage on profits; in other words, the association of the operatives
as virtual partners with the capitalist.†

It is, above all, with reference to the improvement and elevation of the
working classes that complete freedom in the conditions of partnership
is indispensable. gCombinations such as the associations of workpeople,
described in a former chapter, hare the most powerful means of effecting
the social emancipation of the labourers through their own moral
qualities. Nor is the liberty of associationg important solely for its
examples of success, but fully as much so for the sake of attempts which
would not succeed; but by their failure would give instruction more
impressive than can be afforded by anything short of actual experience.
iEveryi theory of social improvement, the worth of which is capable of
being brought to an experimental test, should be permitted, and even
encouraged, to submit itself to that test. From such experiments the
jactive portion ofj the working classes would derive lessons, which they
would be slow to learn from the Edition: current; Page: [904] teaching
of persons supposed to have interests and prejudices adverse to their
good; kwould obtain the means of correcting, at no cost to society,
lwhateverl is now erroneous in their notions of the means of
establishing their independence; and of discovering the conditions,
moral, intellectual, and industrial, which are indispensably necessary
for effecting without injustice, or for effecting at all, the social
regeneration they aspire tok.*

The French law of partnership is superior to the English in permitting
commandite; and superior, in having no such unmanageable instrument as
the Court of Chancery, all cases arising from commercial transactions
being adjudicated in a comparatively cheap and expeditious manner by a
tribunal of merchants. In other respects the French system is far worse
than the English. A mjoint-stockm company with limited responsibility
cannot be formed without the express authorization of the department of
government called the Conseil d’Etat, a body of administrators,
generally entire strangers to industrial transactions, who have no
interest in promoting enterprises, and are apt to think that the purpose
of their institution is to restrain them; whose consent cannot in any
case be obtained without an amount of time and labour which is a very
serious hindrance to the commencement of an enterprise, while the
extreme uncertainty of obtaining that consent at all is a great
discouragement to capitalists who would be willing to subscribe. In
regard to joint-stock companies without limitation of responsibility,
which in England exist in such numbers and are formed with such
facility, nthesen associations cannot, in France, exist at all; for, in
cases of unlimited partnership, the French law does not permit the
division of the capital into transferable shares.

The best existing laws of partnership appear to be those of the New
Edition: current; Page: [905] England States. According to Mr. Carey,*
“nowhere is association so little trammelled by regulations as in New
England; the consequence of which is, that it is carried to a greater
extent there, and particularly in Massachusetts and Rhode Island, than
in any other part of the world. In these states, the soil is covered
with compagnies anonymes—chartered companies—for almost every
conceivable purpose. Every town is a corporation for the management of
its roads, bridges, and schools: which are, therefore, under the direct
control of those who pay for them, and are consequently well managed.
Academies and churches, lyceums and libraries, saving-fund societies,
and trust companies, exist in numbers proportioned to the wants of the
people, and all are corporations. Every district has its local bank, of
a size to suit its wants, the stock of which is owned by the small
capitalists of the neighbourhood, and managed by themselves; the
consequence of which is, that in no part of the world is the system of
banking so perfect—so little liable to vibration in the amount of
loans—the necessary effect of which is, that in none is the value of
property so little affected by changes in the amount or value of the
currency resulting from the movements of their own banking institutions.
In the two states to which we have particularly referred, they are
almost two hundred in number. Massachusetts, alone, offers to our view
fifty-three insurance offices, of various forms, scattered through the
state, and all incorporated. oFactories are incorporated, and are owned
in shareso; and pevery one that has any part in the managementp of their
concerns, from the purchase of the raw material to the sale of the
manufactured article, qis a part ownerq; while every one employed in
them has a prospect of becoming one, by the use of prudence, exertion,
and economy. Charitable associations exist in large numbers, and all are
incorporated. rFishing vessels are owned in sharesr by those who
navigate them; and sthe sailors of a whaling ship depends in a great
degree, if not altogether, tupon the success of the voyage for their
compensationt. Every master of a vessel trading in the Southern Ocean is
a part owner, and the interest he possesses is a strong inducement to
exertion and economy, by aid of which the people of New England are
rapidly driving out the competition of other nations for the trade of
that part of the world. Wherever settled, they exhibit the same tendency
to combination of action. In New York they are the chief owners of uthe
lines of packet shipsu, which vare divided into shares, owned by the
shipbuilders, the merchants, the master, and the matesv; which last
generally acquire the Edition: current; Page: [906] means of becoming
themselves masters, and to this is due their great success. The system
is the most perfectly democratic of any in the world. wIt affords to
every labourer, every sailor, every operative, male or female, the
prospect of advancementw; and its results are precisely such as we
should have reason to expect. In no part of the world are talent,
industry, and prudence, so certain to be largely rewarded.”

xThe cases of insolvency and fraud on the part of chartered companies in
America, which have caused so much loss and so much scandal in Europe,
did not occur in the part of the Union to which this extract refers, but
in other States, in which the right of association is much more fettered
by legal restrictions, and in which, accordingly, joint-stock
associations are not comparable in number or variety to those of New
England. Mr. Carey adds, “A careful examination of the systems of the
several states, can scarcely, we think, fail to convince the reader of
the advantage resulting from permitting men to determine among
themselves the terms upon which they will associate, and allowing the
associations that may be formed to contract with the public as to the
terms upon which they will trade together, whether of the limited or
unlimited liability of the partnersy.”[*] This principle has been
adopted as the foundation of all recent English legislation on the
subjecty.

§ 8. [Laws relating to Insolvency] I proceed to the subject of
Insolvency Laws.

Good laws on this subject are important, first and principally, on the
score of public morals; which are on no point more under the influence
of the law, for good and evil, than in a matter belonging so
pre-eminently to the province of law as the preservation of pecuniary
integrity. But the subject is also, in a merely economical point of
view, of great importance. First, because the economical well-being of a
people, and of mankind, depends in an especial manner upon their being
able to trust each other’s engagements. Secondly, because one of the
risks, or expenses, of industrial operations is the risk or expense of
what are commonly called bad debts, and every saving which can be
effected in this liability is a diminution of cost of production; by
dispensing with an item of outlay which in no way conduces to the
desired end, and which must be paid for either by the Edition: current;
Page: [907] consumer of the commodity, or from the general profits of
capital, according as the burthen is peculiar or general.

The laws and practice of nations on this subject have almost always been
in extremes. The ancient laws of most countries awerea all severity to
the debtor. They binvested the creditor with a power of coercion, more
or less tyrannical, which he might use against his insolvent debtor,
either to extort the surrender of hidden property, or to obtain
satisfaction of a vindictive character, which might console him for the
non-payment of the debt. This arbitrary power has extended, in some
countries, to making the insolvent debtor serve the creditor as his
slave: in which plan there were cat leastc some grains of common sense,
since it might possibly be regarded as a scheme for making him work out
the debt by his labour. In England the coercion assumed the milder form
of ordinary imprisonment. The one and the other were the barbarous
expedients of a rude age, repugnant to justice, as well as to humanity.
Unfortunately the reform of them, like that of the criminal law
generally, has been taken in hand as an affair of humanity only, not of
justice: and the modish humanity of the present time, which is
essentially a thing of one idea, dhas in this as in other cases, gone
into a violent reaction against the ancient severity, and emight almost
be supposed to seee in the fact of having lost or squandered other
people’s property, a peculiar title to indulgence. Everything in the law
which attached disagreeable consequences to that fact, fwasf gradually
relaxed, gorg entirely got rid ofh: until the demoralizing effects of
this laxity became so evident as to determine, by imore recent
legislation, a salutary though very insufficienti movement in the
reverse direction.h

The indulgence of the jlaws to those who have made themselves unable to
pay their just debts, is usually defended, on the plea that the sole
object of the law should be, in case of insolvency, not to coerce the
person of the debtor, but to get at his property, and distribute it
fairly among the creditors. Assuming that this is and ought to be the
sole object, kthe mitigation of the law was in the first instance
carried so far as to sacrifice that objectk. Imprisonment at the
discretion of a creditor was really a Edition: current; Page: [908]
powerful engine for extracting from the debtor any property which he had
concealed or otherwise made away withl; and it remains to be shown by
experience whether, inl depriving creditors of this instrument, the
lawm, even as last amended, has furnished them with am sufficient
equivalent. nBut the doctrine, that the law has done all that ought to
be expected from it, when it has put the creditors in opossession of the
property of an insolvent, is in itself a totally inadmissible piece of
spurious humanity. It is the business of law to prevent wrong-doing, and
not simply to patch up the consequences of it when it has been
committed. The law is bound to take care that insolvency shall not be a
good pecuniary speculation; that men shall not have the privilege of
hazarding other people’s property without their knowledge or consent,
taking the profits of the enterprise if it is successful, and if it
fails throwing the loss upon the prightfulp owners; qandq that they
shall not find it answer to make themselves unable to pay their just
debts, by spending the money of their creditors in personal indulgence.
rIt is admittedr that what is technically called fraudulent bankruptcy,
the false pretence of inability to pay, siss, when detected, tproperlyt
subject to punishment. But does it follow that insolvency is not the
consequence of misconduct because the inability to pay may be real? If a
man has been a spendthrift, or a gambler, with property on which his
creditors had a prior claim, shall he pass scot-free because the
mischief is consummated and the money gone? Is there any very material
difference uin point of moralityu between this conduct, and those other
kinds of dishonesty which go by the names of fraud and embezzlement?

Such cases are not a minority, but a large majority among insolvencies.
The statistics of bankruptcy prove the fact. “By far the greater part of
all insolvencies arise from notorious misconduct; the proceedings of the
Insolvent Debtors Court and of the Bankruptcy Court will prove it.
Excessive and unjustifiable overtrading, or most absurd speculation in
commodities, merely because the poor speculator ‘thought they would get
up,’ but why he thought so he cannot tell; vspeculationv in hops, in
tea, in Edition: current; Page: [909] silk, in corn—things with which he
is altogether unacquainted; wild and absurd investments in foreign
funds, or in joint-stocks; these are among the most innocent causes of
bankruptcy.”* The experienced and intelligent writer from whom I quote,
corroborates his assertion by the testimony of several of the official
assignees of the Bankruptcy Court. One of them says, “As far as I can
collect from the books and documents furnished by the bankrupts, it
seems to me that” in the whole number of cases which occurred during a
given time in the court to which he was attached, “fourteen have been
ruined by speculations in things with which they were unacquainted;
three by wneglectingw book-keeping; ten by trading beyond their capital
and means, and the consequent loss and expense of accommodation-bills;
forty-nine by expending more than they could reasonably hope their
profits would be, though their business yielded a fair return; none by
any general distress, or the falling off of any particular branch of
trade.” Another of these officers says xthat, during a period of
eighteen months, “xfifty-two cases of bankruptcy have come under my
care. It is my opinion that thirty-two of these have arisen from an
imprudent expenditure, and five partly from that cause, and partly from
a pressure on the business in which the bankrupts were employed. Fifteen
I attribute to improvident speculations, combined in many instances with
an extravagant mode of life.”

To these citations the author adds the following statements from his
personal means of knowledgey. “Many insolvencies are produced by
tradesmen’s indolence; they keep no books, or at least imperfect ones,
which they never balance; they never take stock; they employ servants,
if their trade be extensive, whom they are too indolent even to
supervise, and then become insolvent. It is not too much to say, that
one-half of all the persons engaged in trade, even in London, never take
stock at all: they go on year after year without knowing how their
affairs stand, and at last, like the child at school, they find to their
surprise, but one halfpenny left in their pocket. I will venture to say
that not one-fourth of all the persons in the provinces, either
manufacturers, tradesmen, or farmers, ever take stock; nor in fact does
one-half of them ever keep account-books, deserving any other name than
memorandum books. I know sufficient of the concerns of five hundred
small tradesmen in the provinces, to be enabled to say, that not
one-fifth of them ever take stock, or keep even the most ordinary
Edition: current; Page: [910] accounts. I am prepared to say of such
tradesmen, from carefully prepared tables, giving every advantage where
there has been any doubt as to the causes of their insolvency, that
where nine happen from extravagance or dishonesty, one” at most “may be
referred to misfortune alone.”*

Is it rational to expect among the trading classes any high sense of
justice, honour, or integrity, zifz the law enables men who act in this
manner to shuffle off the consequences of their misconduct upon those
who have been so unfortunate as to trust them; and practically proclaims
that it looks upon insolvency thus produced, as a “misfortune,” not an
offence?

It is, of course, not denied, that insolvencies do arise from causes
beyond the control of the debtor, and that, in many more cases, his
culpability is not of a high order; and the law ought to make a
distinction in favour of such cases, but not without a searching
investigation; nor should the case ever be let go without having
ascertained, in the most complete manner practicable, not the fact of
insolvency only, but the cause of it. To have been trusted with money or
money’s worth, and to have lost or spent it, is primâ facie evidence of
something wrong: and it is not for the creditor to prove, which he
cannot do in one case out of ten, that there has been criminality, but
for the debtor to rebut the presumption, by laying open the whole state
of his affairs, and showing either that there has been no misconduct, or
that the misconduct has been of an excusable kind. If he fail in this,
he ought never to be dismissed without a punishment proportioned to the
degree of blame which seems justly imputable to him; which punishment,
however, might be shortened or mitigated in proportion as he appeared
likely to exert himself in repairing the injury done.

It is a common argument with those who approve a relaxed system of
insolvency laws, that credit, except in the great operations of
commerce, is an evil; and that to deprive creditors of legal redress is
a judicious means of preventing credit from being given. That which is
given by retail dealers to unproductive consumers is, no doubt, to the
excess to which it is carried, a considerable evil. This, however, is
only true of large, and especially of long, credits; for there is credit
whenever goods are not paid for before they quit the shop, or, at least,
the custody of the seller; and there would be much inconvenience in
putting an end to this sort of credit. But a large proportion of the
debts on which insolvency laws take effect, are those due by small
tradesmen to the dealers who supply them: and on no class of debts does
the demoralization occasioned by aa bada state of the law, operate more
perniciously. These are commercial credits, which no one Edition:
current; Page: [911] wishes to see curtailed; their existence is of
great importance to the general industry of the country, and to numbers
of honest, well-conducted persons of small means, to whom it would be a
bgreatb injury that they should be prevented from obtaining the
accommodation they need, and would not abuse, through the omission of
the law to provide just remedies against dishonest or reckless
borrowers.

But though it were granted that retail transactions, on any footing but
that of ready money payment, are an evil, and their entire suppression a
fit object for legislation to aim at; a worse mode of compassing that
object could scarcely be invented, than to permit those who have been
trusted by others to cheat and rob them with impunity. The law does not
cgenerallyc select the vices of mankind as the appropriate instrument
for inflicting chastisement on the comparatively innocentd. Whend it
seeks to discourage any course of action, it does so by applying
inducements of its own, not by outlawing those who act in the manner it
deems objectionable, and letting loose the predatory instincts of the
worthless part of mankind to feed upon them. If a man has committed
murder, the law econdemnse him to death; but it does not promise
impunity to anybody who may kill him for the sake of taking his purse.
The offence of believing another’s word, even rashly, is not so heinous
that for the sake of discouraging it, the spectacle should be brought
home to every door, of triumphant rascality, with the law on its side,
mocking the victims it has made. This pestilent example fhas beenf very
widely exhibited since the relaxation of the insolvency laws. It is idle
to expect that, even by absolutely depriving creditors of all legal
redress, the kind of credit which is considered objectionable would
really be very much checked. Rogues and swindlers are still an exception
among mankind, and people will go on trusting each other’s promises.
Large dealers, in abundant business, would refuse credit, as many of
them already do: but in the eager competition of a great town, gor the
dependent position of a village shopkeeper,g what can be expected from
the tradesman to whom a single customer is of importance, the beginner,
perhaps, who is striving to get into business? He will take the risk,
even if it were still greater; he is ruined if he cannot sell his goods,
and he can but be ruined if he is defrauded. Nor does it avail to say,
that he ought to make proper inquiries, and ascertain the character of
those to whom he supplies goods on trust. In some of the most flagrant
cases of profligate debtors which have come Edition: current; Page:
[912] before the Bankruptcy Court, the swindler had been able to give,
and had given, excellent references.*

Edition: current; Page: [913]


CHAPTER X: Of Interferences of Government Grounded on Erroneous Theories

§ 1. [Doctrine of Protection to Native Industry] From the necessary
functions of government, and the effects produced on the economical
interests of society by their good or ill discharge, we proceed to the
functions which belong to what I have termeda, for want of a better
designation,a the optional class; those which are sometimes assumed by
governments and sometimes not, and which it is not unanimously admitted
that they ought to exercise.

Before entering on the general principles of the question, it will be
advisable to clear from our path all those cases, in which government
interference works ill because grounded on false views of the subject
interfered with. Such cases have no connexion with any theory respecting
the proper limits of interference. There are some things with which
governments ought not to meddle, and other things with which they ought;
but whether right or wrong in itself, the interference must work for
ill, if government, not understanding the subject which it meddles with,
meddles to bring about a result which would be mischievous. We will
therefore begin by passing in review various false theories, which have
from time to time formed the ground of acts of government more or less
economically injurious.

Former writers on political economy have found it needful to devote much
trouble and space to this department of their subject. It has now
happily become possible, at least in our own country, greatly to abridge
this purely negative part of our discussions. The false theories of
political economy which have done so much mischief in times past, are
entirely discredited among all who have not lagged behind the general
progress of opinion; and few of the enactments which were once grounded
on those theories still help to deform the statute-book. As the
principles on which their condemnation rests have been fully set forth
in other parts of this Treatise, we may here content ourselves with a
few brief indications.

Of these false theories, the most notable is the doctrine of Protection
to Edition: current; Page: [914] Native Industry; a phrase meaning the
prohibition, or the discouragement by heavy duties, of such foreign
commodities as are capable of being produced at home. If the theory
involved in this system had been correct, the practical conclusions
grounded on it would not have been unreasonable. The theory was, that to
buy things produced at home was a national benefit, and the introduction
of foreign commodities generally a national loss. It being at the same
time evident that the interest of the consumer is to buy foreign
commodities in preference to domestic whenever they are either cheaper
or better, the interest of the consumer appeared in this respect to be
contrary to the public interest; he was certain, if left to his own
inclinations, to do what according to the theory was injurious to the
public.

It was shown, however, in our analysis of the effects of international
trade, as it had been often shown by former writers, that the
importation of foreign commodities, in the common course of traffic,
never takes place, except when it is, economically speaking, a national
good, by causing the same amount of commodities to be obtained at a
smaller cost of labour and capital to the country. To prohibit,
therefore, this importation, or impose duties which prevent it, is to
render the labour and capital of the country less efficient in
production than they would otherwise be; and compel a waste, of the
difference between the labour and capital necessary for the home
production of the commodity, and that which is required for producing
the things with which it can be purchased from abroad. The amount of
national loss thus occasioned is measured by the excess of the price at
which the commodity is produced over that at which it could be imported.
In the case of manufactured goods, the whole difference between the two
prices is absorbed in indemnifying the producers for waste of labour, or
of the capital which supports that labour. Those who are supposed to be
benefited, namely, the makers of the protected articles, (unless they
form an exclusive company, and have a monopoly against their own
countrymen as well as against foreigners,) do not obtain higher profits
than other people. All is sheer loss, to the country as well as to the
consumer. When the protected article is a product of agriculture—the
waste of labour not being incurred on the whole produce, but only on
what may be called the last instalment of it—the extra price is only in
part an indemnity for waste, the remainder being a tax paid to the
landlords.

The restrictive and prohibitory policy was originally grounded on what
is called the Mercantile System, which representing the advantage of
foreign trade to consist solely in bringing money into the country, gave
artificial encouragement to exportation of goods, and discountenanced
their importation. The only exceptions to the system were those required
by the system itself. The materials and instruments of production were
the subjects of a contrary policy, directed however to the same end;
they were freely Edition: current; Page: [915] imported, and not
permitted to be exported, in order that manufacturers, being more
cheaply supplied with the requisites of manufacture, might be able to
sell cheaper, and therefore to export more largely. For a similar
reason, importation was ballowedb and even favoured, when confined to
the productions of countries which were supposed to take from cthe
countryc still more than ditd took from them, thus enriching eite by a
favourable balance of trade. As part of the same system, colonies were
founded, for the supposed advantage of compelling them to buy our
commodities, or at all events not to buy those of any other country: in
return for which restriction, we were generally willing to come under an
equivalent obligation with respect to the staple productions of the
colonists. The consequences of the theory were pushed so far, that it
was not unusual even to give bounties on exportation, and induce
foreigners to buy from us rather than from other countries, by a
cheapness which we artificially produced, by paying part of the price
for them out of our own taxes. This is a stretch beyond the point yet
reached by any private tradesman in his competition for business. No
shopkeeper, I should think, ever made a practice of bribing customers by
selling goods to them at a permanent loss, making it up to himself from
other funds in his possession.

The principle of the Mercantile Theory is now given up even by writers
and governments who still cling to the restrictive system. Whatever hold
that system has over men’s minds, independently of the private interests
fexposed to real or apprehended loss by its abandonment, is derived from
fallacies other than the old notion of the benefits of heaping up money
in the country. The most effective of these is the specious plea of
employing our own countrymen and our national industry, instead of
feeding and supporting the industry of foreigners. The answer to this,
from the principles laid down in former chapters, is evident. Without
reverting to the fundamental theorem discussed in an early part of the
present treatise,* respecting the nature and sources of employment for
labour, it is sufficient to say, what has usually been said by the
advocates of free trade, that the alternative is not between employing
our own gpeopleg and foreigners, but between employing one class and
another of our own hpeopleh. The imported commodity is always paid for,
directly or indirectly, with the produce of our own industry: that
industry being, at the same time rendered more productive, since, with
the same labour and outlay, we are enabled to possess ourselves of a
greater quantity of the article. Those who have not Edition: current;
Page: [916] well considered the subject are apt to suppose that our
exporting an equivalent in our own produce, for the foreign articles we
consume, depends on contingencies—on the consent of foreign countries to
make some corresponding relaxation of their own restrictions, or on the
question whether those from whom we buy are induced by that circumstance
to buy more from us; and that, if these things, or things equivalent to
them, do not happen, the payment must be made in money. Now, in the
first place, there is nothing more objectionable in a money payment than
in payment by any other medium, if the state of the market makes it the
most advantageous remittance; and the money itself was first acquired,
and would again be replenished, by the export of an equivalent value of
our own products. But, in the next place, a very short interval of
paying in money would so lower prices as either to stop a part of the
importation, or raise up a foreign demand for our produce, sufficient to
pay for the imports. I grant that this disturbance of the equation of
international demand would be in some degree to our disadvantage, in the
purchase of other imported articles; and that a country which prohibits
some foreign commodities, does, cæteris paribus, obtain those which it
does not prohibit, at a less price than it would otherwise have to pay.
To express the same thing in other words; a country which destroys or
prevents altogether certain branches of foreign trade, thereby
annihilating a general gain to the world, which would be shared in some
proportion between itself and other countries—does, in some
circumstances, draw to itself, at the expense of foreigners, a larger
share than would else belong to it of the gain arising from that portion
of its foreign trade which it suffers to subsist. But even this it can
only be enabled to do, if foreigners do not maintain equivalent
prohibitions or restrictions against its commodities. In any case, the
justice or expediency of destroying one of two gains, in order to
engross a rather larger share of the other, does not require much
discussion: the gain, too, which is destroyed, being, in proportion to
the magnitude of the transactions, the larger of the two, since it is
the one which capital, left to itself, is supposed to seek by
preference.

Defeated as a general theory, the Protectionist doctrine finds support
in some particular cases, from considerations which, when really in
point, involve greater interests than mere saving of labour; the
interests of national subsistence and of national defence. The
discussions on the Corn Laws have familiarized everybody with the plea,
that we ought to be independent of foreigners for the food of the
people; and the Navigation Laws iwerei grounded, in theory and
profession, on the necessity of keeping up a “nursery of seamen” for the
navy. On this last subject I at once admit, that the object is worth the
sacrifice; and that a country exposed to invasion Edition: current;
Page: [917] by sea, if it cannot otherwise have sufficient ships and
sailors of its own to secure the means of manning on an emergency an
adequate fleet, is quite right in obtaining those means, even at janj
economical sacrifice in point of cheapness of transport. When the
English Navigation Laws were enacted, the Dutch, from their maritime
skill and their low rate of profit at home, were able to carry for other
nations, England included, at cheaper rates than those nations could
carry for themselves: which placed all other countries at a great
comparative disadvantage in obtaining experienced seamen for their ships
of war. The Navigation Laws, by which this deficiency was remedied, and
at the same time a blow struck against the maritime power of a nation
with which England was then frequently engaged in hostilities, were
probably, though economically disadvantageous, politically expedient.
But English ships and sailors can now navigate as cheaply as those of
any other country; maintaining at least an equal competition with the
other maritime nations even in their own trade. The ends which may once
have justified Navigation Laws, require them no longer, and kaffordedk
no reason for maintaining this invidious exception to the general rule
of free trade.

With regard to subsistence, the plea of the Protectionists has been so
often and so triumphantly met, that it requires little notice here. That
country is the most steadily as well as the most abundantly supplied
with food, which draws its supplies from the largest surface. It is
ridiculous to found a general system of policy on so limprobablel a
danger as that of being at war with all the nations of the world at
once; or to suppose that, even if inferior at sea, a whole country could
be blockaded like a town, or that the growers of food in other countries
would not be as anxious not to lose an advantageous market, as we should
be not to be deprived of their corn. On the subject, however, of
subsistence, there is one point which deserves more mespecialm
consideration. In cases of actual or apprehended scarcity, many
countries of Europe are accustomed to stop the exportation of food. Is
this, or not, sound policy? There can be no doubt that in the present
state of international morality, a people cannot, any more than an
individual, be blamed for not starving itself to feed others. But if the
greatest amount of good to mankind on the whole, were the end aimed at
in the maxims of international conduct, such collective churlishness
would certainly be condemned by them. Suppose that in ordinary
circumstances the trade in food were perfectly free, so that the price
in one country could not habitually exceed that in any other by more
than the cost of carriage, together with a moderate profit to the
importer. A general scarcity ensues, affecting all countries, but in
unequal degrees. If the price rose in one Edition: current; Page: [918]
country more than in others, it would be a proof that in that country
the scarcity was severest, and that by permitting food to go freely
thither from any other country, it would be spared from a less urgent
necessity to relieve a greater. When the interests, therefore, of all
countries are considered, free exportation is desirable. To the
exporting country considered separately, it may, at least on the
particular occasion, be an inconvenience: but taking into account that
the country which is now the giver, will in some future season be the
receiver, and the one that is benefited by the freedom, I cannot but
think that even to the apprehension of food rioters it might be made
apparent, that in such cases they should do to others what they would
wish done to themselves.

In countries in which the nProtection theoryn is declining, but not yet
ogiven up, such as the United States, a doctrine has come into notice
which is a sort of compromise between free trade and restriction,
namely, that protection for protection’s sake is improper, but that
there is nothing objectionable in having as much protection as may
incidentally result from a tariff framed solely for revenue. Even in
England, regret is sometimes expressed that a “moderate fixed duty” was
not preserved on corn, on account of the revenue it would yield.
Independently, however, of the general impolicy of taxes on the
necessaries of life, this doctrine overlooks the fact, that revenue is
received only on the quantity imported, but that the tax is paid on the
entire quantity consumed. To make the public pay much that the treasury
may receive a little, is pnot anp eligible mode of obtaining a revenue.
In the case of manufactured articles the doctrine involves a palpable
inconsistency. The object of the duty as a means of revenue, is
inconsistent with its affording, even incidentally, any protection. It
can only operate as protection in so far as it prevents importation; and
to whatever degree it prevents importation, it affords no revenue.

The only case in which, on mere principles of political economy,
protecting duties can be defensible, is when they are imposed
temporarily (especially in a young and rising nation) in hopes of
naturalizing a foreign industry, in itself perfectly suitable to the
circumstances of the country. The superiority of one country over
another in a branch of production, often arises only from having begun
it sooner. There may be no inherent advantage on one part, or
disadvantage on the other, but only a present superiority of acquired
skill and experience. A country which has this skill and experience yet
to acquire, may in other respects be better adapted to the production
than those which were earlier in the field: and besides, it is a just
remark qof Mr. Raeq, that nothing has a greater tendency to promote
Edition: current; Page: [919] improvements in any branch of production,
than its trial under a new set of conditions. But it cannot be expected
that individuals should, at their own risk, or rather to their certain
loss, introduce a new manufacture, and bear the burthen of carrying it
on until the producers have been educated up to the level of those with
whom the processes are traditional. A protecting duty, continued for a
reasonable time, rmightr sometimes be the least inconvenient mode in
which the nation can tax itself for the support of such an experiment.
But sit is essential thats the protection should be confined to cases in
which there is good ground of assurance that the industry which it
fosters will after a time be able to dispense with it; nor should the
domestic producers ever be allowed to expect that it will be continued
to them beyond the time tnecessary for a fair trial of what they are
capable of accomplishing.

uThe only writer, of any reputation as a political economist, who now
adheres to the Protectionist doctrine, Mr. H. C. Carey, rests its
defence, in an economic point of view, principally on two reasons. One
is, the great saving in cost of carriage, consequent on producing
commodities at or very near to the place where they are to be consumed.
The whole of the cost of carriage, both on the commodities imported and
on those exported in exchange for them, he regards as a direct burthen
on the producers, and not, as is obviously the truth, on the consumers.
On whomsoever it falls, it is, without doubt, a burthen on the industry
of the world. But it is obvious (and that Mr. Carey does not see it, is
one of the many surprising things in his book) that the burthen is only
borne for a more than equivalent advantage. If the commodity is bought
in a foreign country with domestic produce in spite of the double cost
of carriage, the fact proves that, heavy as that cost may be, the saving
in cost of production outweighs it, and the collective labour of the
country is on the whole better remunerated than if the article were
produced at home. Cost of carriage is a natural protecting duty, which
free trade has no power to abrogate: and unless America gained more by
obtaining her manufactures through the medium of her corn and cotton
than she loses in cost of carriage, the capital employed in producing
corn and cotton in annually increased quantities for the foreign market,
would turn to manufactures instead. The natural vadvantagesv attending a
mode of industry in which there is less cost of carriage to pay, can at
most be only a justification for a temporary and merely tentative
protection. The expenses of production being always greatest at first,
it may happen that the home production, though really the most
advantageous, may not become so until after a certain duration of
pecuniary loss, which Edition: current; Page: [920] it is not to be
expected that private speculators should incur in order that their
successors may be benefited by their ruin. I have therefore conceded
that in a new country a temporary protecting duty may sometimes be
economically defensible; on condition, however, that it be strictly
limited in point of time, and provision be made that during the latter
part of its existence it be on a gradually decreasing scale. Such
temporary protection is of the same nature as a patent, and should be
governed by similar conditions.

The remaining argument of Mr. Carey in support of the economic benefits
of Protectionism, applies only to countries whose exports consist of
agricultural produce. He argues, that by a trade of this description
they actually send away their soil: the distant consumers not giving
back to the land of the country, as home consumers would do, the
fertilizing elements which they abstract from it. This argument deserves
attention on account of the physical truth on which it is founded; a
truth which has only lately come to be understood, but which is
henceforth destined to be a permanent element in the thoughts of
statesmen, as it must always have been in the destinies of nations. To
the question of Protectionism, however, it is irrelevant. That the
immense growth of raw produce in America to be consumed in Europe, is
progressively exhausting the soil of the Eastern, and even of the older
Western States, and that both are already far less productive than
formerly, is credible in itself, even if no one bore witness to it. But
what I have already said respecting cost of carriage, is true also of
the cost of manuring. Free trade does not compel America to export corn:
she would cease to do so if it ceased to be to her advantage. As, then,
she would not persist in exporting raw produce and importing
manufactures, any longer than the labour she saved by doing so exceeded
what the carriage cost her, so when it became necessary for her to
replace in the soil the elements of fertility which she had sent away,
if the saving in cost of production were more than equivalent to the
cost of carriage and of manure together, manure would be imported; and
if not, the export of corn would cease. It is evident that one of these
two things would already have taken place, if there had not been near at
hand a constant succession of new soils, not yet exhausted of their
fertility, the cultivation of which enables her, whether judiciously or
not, to postpone the question of manure. As soon as it no longer answers
better to break up new soils than to manure the old, America will either
become a regular importer of manure, or will, without protecting duties,
grow corn for herself only, and manufacturing for herself, will make her
manure, as Mr. Carey desires, at home.*

Edition: current; Page: [921]
For these obvious reasons, I hold Mr. Carey’s economic arguments for
Protectionism to be totally invalid. The economic, however, is far from
being the strongest point of his case. American Protectionists often
reason extremely ill; but it is an injustice to them to suppose that
their Protectionist creed rests upon nothing superior to an economic
blunder. Many of them have been led to it, much more by consideration
for the higher interests of humanity, than by purely economic reasons.
They, and Mr. Carey at their head, deem it a necessary condition of
human improvement that towns should abound; that men should combine
their labour, by means of interchange—with near neighbours, with people
of pursuits, capacities, and mental cultivation different from their
own, sufficiently close at hand for mutual sharpening of wits and
enlarging of ideas—rather than with people on the opposite side of the
globe. They believe that a nation all engaged in the same, or nearly the
same, pursuit—a nation all agricultural—cannot attain a high state of
civilization and culture. And for this there is a great foundation of
reason. If the difficulty can be overcome, the United States, with their
free institutions, their universal schooling, and their omnipresent
press, are the people to do it; but whether this is possible or not is
still a problem. So far, however, as it is an object to check the
excessive dispersion of the population, Mr. Wakefield has pointed out a
better way; to modify the existing method of disposing of the unoccupied
lands, by raising the price, instead of lowering it, or giving away the
land gratuitously, as is largely done since the passing of the Homestead
Act. To cut the knot in Mr. Carey’s fashion, by Protectionism, it would
be necessary that Ohio and Michigan should be protected against
Massachusetts as well as against England: for the manufactories of New
England, no more than those of the old country, accomplish his
desideratum of bringing a manufacturing population to the doors of the
Western farmer. Boston and New York do not supply the want of local
towns to the Western prairies, any better than Manchester; and it is as
difficult to get back the manure from the one place as from the other.u

Edition: current; Page: [922]
There is only one part of the Protectionist scheme which requires any
further notice: its policy towards colonies, and foreign dependencies;
that of compelling them to trade exclusively with the dominant country.
A country which thus secures to itself an extra foreign demand for its
commodities, undoubtedly gives itself some advantage in the distribution
of the general gains of the commercial world. Since, however, it causes
the industry and capital of the colony to be diverted from channels,
which are proved to be the most productive, inasmuch as they are those
into which industry and capital spontaneously tend to flow; there is a
loss, on the whole, to the productive powers of the world, and the
mother country does not gain so much as she makes the colony lose. If,
therefore, the mother country refuses to acknowledge any reciprocity of
obligation, she imposes a tribute on the colony in an indirect mode,
greatly more oppressive and injurious than the direct. But if, with a
more equitable spirit, she submits herself to corresponding restrictions
for the benefit of the colony, the result of the whole transaction is
the ridiculous one, that each party loses much, in order that the other
may gain a little.

§ 2. [Usury Laws] Next to the system of Protection, among mischievous
interferences with the spontaneous course of industrial transactions,
may be noticed certain interferences with contracts. One instance is
that of the Usury Laws. These originated in a religious prejudice
against receiving interest on money, derived from that fruitful source
of mischief in modern Europe, the attempted adaptation to Christianity
of doctrines and precepts drawn from the Jewish law. In Mahomedan
nations the receiving of interest is formally interdicted, and rigidly
abstained from: and Sismondi has noticed, as one among the causes of the
industrial inferiority of the Catholic, compared with the Protestant
parts of Europe, that the Catholic Church in the middle ages gave its
sanction to the same prejudice; which subsists, impaired but not
destroyed, wherever that religion is acknowledged. Where law or
conscientious scruples prevent lending at interest, the capital which
belongs to persons not in business is lost to productive purposes, or
can be applied to them only in peculiar circumstances of personal
connexion, or by a subterfuge. Industry is thus limited to the capital
of the undertakers, and to what they can borrow from persons not bound
by the same laws or religion as themselves. In Mussulman countries the
bankers and money dealers are either Hindoos, Armenians, or Jews.

In more improved countries, legislation no longer discountenances the
receipt of an equivalent for money lent; but it ahas everywhere
interfereda with the free agency of the lender and borrowers, by fixing
a legal limit to the rate of interest, and making the receipt of more
than the appointed Edition: current; Page: [923] maximum a penal
offence. This restriction, though approved by Adam Smith, has been
condemned by all enlightened persons since the triumphant onslaught made
upon it by Bentham in his “Letters on Usury,” which may still be
referred to as the best extant writing on the subject.

Legislators may enact and maintain Usury Laws from one of two motives:
ideas of public policy, or concern for the interest of the parties binb
the contract; in this case, of one party only, the borrower. As a matter
of policy, the notion may possibly be, that it is for the general good
that interest should be low. cIt is dhoweverd a misapprehension of the
causes which influence commercial transactions, to suppose that the rate
of interest is really made lower by law, than it would be made by the
spontaneous play of supply and demand. If the competition of borrowers,
left unrestrained, would raise the rate of interest to six per cent,
this proves that at five there would be a greater demand for loans, than
there is capital in the market to supply. If the law in these
circumstances permits no interest beyond five per cent, there will be
some lenders, who not choosing to disobey the law, and not being in a
condition to employ their capital otherwise, will content themselves
with the legal rate: but others, finding that in a season of pressing
demand, more may be made of their capital by other means than they are
permitted to make by lending it, will not lend it at all; and the
loanable capital, already too small for the demand, will be still
further diminished. Of the disappointed candidates there will be many at
such periods, who must have their necessities supplied at any price, and
these will readily find a third section of lenders, who will not be
averse to join in a violation of the law, either by circuitous
transactions partaking of the nature of fraud, or by relying on the
honour of the borrower. The extra expense of the roundabout mode of
proceeding, and an equivalent for the risk of nonpayment and of legal
penalties, must be paid by the borrower, over and above the extra
interest which would ehave been required of him by the general state of
the market. The laws which were intended to lower the price paid by him
for pecuniary accommodation, end thus in greatly increasing it. These
laws have also a directly demoralizing tendency. Knowing the difficulty
of detecting an illegal pecuniary transaction between two persons, in
which no third person is involved, so long as it is the interest of both
to keep the secret, legislators have adopted the expedient of tempting
the borrower to become the informer, by making the annulment of the debt
a part of the penalty for the offence; thus rewarding men for ffirstf
Edition: current; Page: [924] obtaining the property of others by false
promises, and then not only refusing payment, but invoking legal
penalties on those who have helped them in their need. The moral sense
of mankind very rightly infamizes those who resist an otherwise just
claim on the ground of usury, and tolerates such a plea only when
resorted to as the best legal defence available against an attempt
really considered as partaking of fraud or extortion. But this very
severity of public opinion renders the enforcement of the laws so
difficult, and the infliction of the penalties so rare, that when it
does occur it merely victimizes an individual, and has no effect on
general practice.

In so far as the motive of the restriction may be supposed to be, not
public policy, but regard for the interest of the borrower, it would be
difficult to point out any case in which such tenderness on the
legislator’s part is more misplaced. A person of sane mind, and of the
age at which persons are legally competent to conduct their own
concerns, must be presumed to be a sufficient guardian of his pecuniary
interests. If he may sell an estate, or grant a release, or assign away
all his property, without control from the law, it seems very
unnecessary that the only bargain which he cannot make without its
intermeddling, should be a loan of money. The law seems to presume that
the money-lender, dealing with necessitous persons, can take advantage
of their necessities, and exact conditions limited only by his own
pleasure. It might be so if there were only one money-lender within
reach. But when there is the whole monied capital of a wealthy community
to resort to, no borrower is placed under any disadvantage in the market
merely by the urgency of his need. If he cannot borrow at the interest
paid by other people, it must be because he cannot give such good
security: and competition will limit the extra demand to a fair
equivalent for the risk of his proving insolvent. Though the law intends
favour to the borrower, it is to him above all that injustice is, in
this case, done by it. What can be more unjust than that a person who
cannot give perfectly good security, should be prevented from borrowing
of persons who are willing to lend money to him, by their not being
permitted to receive the rate of interest which would be a just
equivalent for their risk? Through the mistaken kindness of the law, he
must either go without the money which is perhaps necessary to save him
from much greater losses, or be driven to expedients of a far more
ruinous description, which the law either has not found it possible, or
has not happened, to interdict.

Adam Smith rather hastily expressed the opinion, that only two kinds of
persons, “prodigals and projectors,”[*] could require to borrow money at
more than the market rate of interest. He should have included all
persons who are in any pecuniary difficulties, however temporary their
necessities Edition: current; Page: [925] may be. It may happen to any
person in business, to be disappointed of the resources on which he had
calculated for meeting some engagement, the non-fulfilment of which on a
fixed day would be bankruptcy. In periods of commercial difficulty, this
is the condition of many prosperous mercantile firms, who become
competitors for the small amount of disposable capital which, in a time
of general distrust, the owners are willing to part with. gUnder the
English usury laws, now happily abolishedg, the limitations imposed by
those laws were felt as a most serious aggravation of every commercial
crisis. Merchants who could have obtained the aid they required at an
interest of seven or eight per cent for short periods, were obliged to
give 20 or 30 hper centh, or to resort to forced sales of goods at a
still greater loss. Experience having obtruded these evils on the notice
of Parliament, the sort of compromise took place, of which English
legislation affords so many instances, and which helps to make our laws
and policy the mass of inconsistency that they are. iThe law was
reformedi as a person reforms a tight shoe, who cuts a hole in it where
it pinches hardest, and continues to wear it. Retaining the erroneous
principle as a general rule, Parliament allowed an exception in the case
in which the practical mischief was most flagrant. It left the usury
laws unrepealed, but exempted bills of exchange, of not more than three
months date, from their operation. Some years afterwards the laws were
repealed in regard to all other contracts, but left in force as to all
those which relate to land. Not a particle of reason could be given for
making this extraordinary distinction: but the “agricultural mind” was
of opinion that the interest on mortgages, though it hardly ever jcamej
up to the permitted point, would come up to a still higher point; and
the kusuryk laws lwerel maintained that the landlords mmightm as they
nthoughtn, be enabled to borrow below the market rate, as the corn-laws
were okept up that the same class might be able to sell corn above the
market rate. The modesty of the pretension pwasp quite worthy of the
intelligence which qcouldq think that the end aimed at rwasr in any way
forwarded by the means used.

With regard to the “prodigals and projectors” spoken of by Adam Smith;
no law can prevent a prodigal from ruining himself, unless it lays him
or his property under actual restraint, saccording to the unjustifiable
practice of the Roman Law and some of the Continental systems founded on
its. The Edition: current; Page: [926] only effect of usury laws upon a
prodigal, is to make his ruin rather more expeditious, by driving him to
a disreputable class of money-dealers, and rendering the conditions more
onerous by the extra risk created by the law. As for projectors, t(a
term, in its unfavourable sense, rather unfairly applied to every person
who has a project)t; such laws may put a veto upon the prosecution of
the most promising enterprise, when planned, as it generally is, by a
person who does not possess capital adequate to its successful
completion. Many of the greatest improvements were at first looked shyly
on by capitalists, and had to wait long before they found one
sufficiently adventurous to be the first in a new path: many years
elapsed before Stephenson could convince even the enterprising
mercantile public of Liverpool and Manchester, of the advantage of
substituting railways for turnpike roads; and plans on which great
labour and large sums have been expended with little visible result,
(the epoch in their progress when predictions of failure are umost
rife,) may be indefinitely suspended, or altogether dropped, and the
outlay all lost, if, when the original funds are exhausted, the law will
not allow more to be raised on the terms on which people are willing to
expose it to the chances of an enterprise not yet secure of success.

§ 3. [Attempts to regulate the prices of commodities] Loans are not the
only kind of contract, of which governments have thought themselves
qualified to regulate the conditions better than the persons interested.
There is scarcely any commodity which they have not, at some place or
time, endeavoured to make either dearer or cheaper than it would be if
left to itself. The most plausible case for artificially cheapening a
commodity, is that of food. The desirableness of the object is in this
case undeniable. But since the average price of food, like that of other
things, conforms to the cost of production, with the addition of the
usual profit; if this price is not expected by the farmer, he will,
unless compelled by law, produce no more than he requires for his own
consumption: and the law, therefore, if absolutely determined to have
food cheaper, must substitute, for the ordinary motives to cultivation,
a system of penalties. If it shrinks from doing this, it has no resource
but that of taxing the whole nation, to give a bounty or premium to the
grower or importer of corn, thus giving everybody cheap bread at the
expense of all: in reality a largess to those who do not pay taxes, at
the expense of those who do; one of the aforms of a practice essentially
bad, that of converting the working classes into unworking classes by
making them a present of subsistence.

It is not however so much the general or average price of food, as its
Edition: current; Page: [927] occasional high price in times of
emergency, which governments have studied to reduce. In some cases, as
for example the famous “maximum” of the revolutionary government of
1793, the compulsory regulation was an attempt by the ruling powers to
counteract the necessary consequences of their own acts; to scatter an
indefinite abundance of the circulating medium with one hand, and keep
down prices with the other; a thing manifestly impossible under any
régime except one of unmitigated terror. In case of actual scarcity,
governments are often urged, as they were in the Irish emergency of
1847, to take measures of some sort for moderating the price of food.
But the price of a thing cannot be raised by deficiency of supply,
beyond what is sufficient to make a corresponding reduction of the
consumption; and if a government prevents this reduction from being
brought about by a rise of price, there remains no mode of effecting it
unless by taking possession of all the food, and serving it out in
rations, as in a besieged town. In a real scarcity, nothing can afford
general relief, except a determination by the richer classes to diminish
their own consumption. If they buy and consume their usual quantity of
food, and content themselves with giving money, they do no good. The
price is forced up until the poorest competitors have no longer the
means of competing, and the privation of food is thrown exclusively upon
the indigent, the other classes being only affected pecuniarily. When
the supply is insufficient, somebody must consume less, and if every
rich person is determined not to be that somebody, all they do by
subsidizing their poorer competitors is to force up the price so much
the higher, with no effect but to enrich the corn-dealers, the very
reverse of what is desired by those who recommend such measures. All
that governments can do in these emergencies, is to counsel a general
moderation in consumption, and to interdict such kinds of it as are not
of primary importance. Direct measures at the cost of the state, to
procure food from a distance, are expedient when from peculiar reasons
the thing is not likely to be done by private speculation. In any other
case they are a great error. Private speculators will not, in such
cases, venture to compete with the government; and though a government
can do more than any one merchant, it cannot do nearly so much as all
merchants.

§ 4. [Monopolies] Governments, however, are oftener chargeable with
having attempted, atoo successfully, to make things dear, than with
having aimed by wrong means at making them cheap. The usual instrument
for producing artificial dearness is monopoly. To confer a monopoly upon
a producer or dealer, or upon a set of producers or dealers bnot toob
numerous to combine, is to give them the power of levying any amount of
taxation on the public, for their individual benefit, which will not
make the Edition: current; Page: [928] public forego the use of the
commodity. When the sharers in the monopoly are so numerous and so
widely scattered that they are prevented from combining, the evil is
considerably less: but even then the competition is not so active among
a limited as among an unlimited number. Those who feel assured of a fair
average proportion in the general business, are seldom eager to get a
larger share by foregoing a portion of their profits. A limitation of
competition, however partial, may have mischievous effects quite
disproportioned to the apparent cause. The mere exclusion of foreigners,
from a branch of industry open to the free competition of every native,
has been known, even in cEngland, to render that branch a conspicuous
exception to the general industrial energy of the country. The silk
manufacture of England remained far behind that of other countries of
Europe, so long as the foreign fabrics were prohibited. In addition to
the tax levied for the profit, real or imaginary, of the monopolists,
the consumer thus pays an additional tax for their laziness and
incapacity. When relieved from the immediate stimulus of competition,
producers and dealers grow indifferent to the dictates of their ultimate
pecuniary interest; preferring to the most hopeful prospects, the
present ease of adhering to routine. A person who is already thriving,
seldom puts himself out of his way to commence even a lucrative
improvement, unless urged by the additional motive of fear lest some
rival should supplant him by getting possession of it before him.

The condemnation of monopolies ought not to extend to patents, by which
the originator of an improved process is dallowedd to enjoy, for a
limited period, the exclusive privilege of using his own improvement.
This is not making the commodity dear for his benefit, but merely
postponing a part of the increased cheapness which the public owe to the
inventor, in order to compensate and reward him for the service. That he
ought to be both compensated and rewarded for it, will not be denied,
and also that if all were at once allowed to avail themselves of his
ingenuity, without having shared the labours or the expenses which he
had to incur in bringing his idea into a practical shape, either such
expenses and labours would be undergone by nobody except every opulent
and very public-spirited persons, or the state must put a value on the
service rendered by an inventor, and make him a pecuniary grant. This
has been done in some instances, and may be done without inconvenience
in cases of very conspicuous public benefit; but in general an exclusive
privilege, of temporary duration, is preferable; because it leaves
nothing to any one’s discretion; because the reward conferred by it
depends upon the invention’s being found useful, and the greater the
usefulness the greater the reward; and because it is paid by the very
persons to whom the service is rendered, the consumers of the Edition:
current; Page: [929] commodity. So decisive, indeed, are fthesef
considerations, that if the system of patents were abandoned for that of
rewards by the state, the best shape which these could assume would be
that of a small temporary tax, imposed for the inventor’s benefit, on
all persons making use of the invention. gTo this, however, or to any
other system which would vest in the state the power of deciding whether
an inventor should derive any pecuniary advantage from the public
benefit which he confers, the objections are evidently stronger and more
fundamental than the strongest which can possibly be urged against
patentsh. It is generally admitted that the present Patent Laws need
much improvement; but in this case, as well as in the closely analogous
one of Copyright, it would be a gross immorality in the law to set
everybody free to use a person’s work without his consent, and without
giving him an equivalent.h I have seen with real alarm several recent
attempts, in quarters carrying some authority, to impugn the principle
of patents altogether; attempts which, if practically successful, would
enthrone free stealing under the prostituted name of free trade, and
make the men of brains, still more than at present, the needy retainers
and dependents of the men of money-bags.g

§ 5. [Laws against Combination of Workmen] I pass to another kind of
government interference, in which the end and the means are alike
odious, but which existed in England until not amore thana ba
generationb ago, and cin France up to the year 1864c. I mean the laws
against combinations of workmen to raise wages; laws enacted and
maintained for the declared purpose of keeping wages low, as the famous
Statute of Labourers was passed by a legislature of employers, to
prevent the labouring class, when its numbers had been thinned by a
pestilence, from taking advantage of the diminished competition to
obtain higher wages. Such laws exhibit the infernal spirit of the slave
master, when to retain the working classes in avowed slavery has ceased
to be practicable.

If it were possible for the working classes, by combining among
themselves, to raise or keep up the general rate of wages, it needs
hardly be said that this would be a thing not to be punished, but to be
welcomed and rejoiced at. Unfortunately the effect is quite beyond
attainment by such means. The multitudes who compose the working class
are too numerous and too widely scattered to combine at all, much more
to combine effectually. If they could do so, they might doubtless
succeed in diminishing the Edition: current; Page: [930] hours of
labour, and obtaining the same wages for less work. dThey would also
have a limited power of obtaining, by combination, an increase of
general wages at the expense of profits. But the limits of this power
are narrow; and were they to attempt to strain it beyond those limits,d
this could only be accomplished by keeping a part of their number
permanently out of employment. As support from public charity would of
course be refused to those who could get work and would not accept it,
they would be thrown for support upon the trades union of which they
were members; and the eworkpeoplee collectively would be no better off
than before, having to support the same numbers out of the same
aggregate wages. In this way, however, the class would have its
attention forcibly drawn to the fact of a superfluity of numbers, and to
the necessity, if they would have high wages, of proportioning the
supply of labour to the demand.

Combinations to keep up wages are sometimes successful, in trades where
the workpeople are few in number, and collected in a small number of
local centres. It is questionable if combinations ever had the smallest
effect on the permanent remuneration of spinners or weavers; but the
journeymen type-founders, by a close combination, are able, it is said,
to keep up a rate of wages much beyond that which is usual in
employments of equal hardness and skill; and even the tailors, a much
more numerous class, are understood to have had, to some extent, a
similar success. A rise of wages, thus confined to particular
employments, is not (like a rise of general wages) defrayed from
profits, but raises the value and price of the particular article, and
falls on the consumer; the capitalist who produces the commodity being
only injured in so far as the high price tends to narrow the market; and
not even then, unless it does so in a greater ratio than that of the
rise of price: for though, at higher wages, he employs, with a given
capital, fewer fworkpeoplef, and obtains less of the commodity, yet if
he can sell the whole of this diminished quantity at the higher price,
his profits are as great as before.

This partial rise of wages, if not gained at the expense of the
remainder of the working class, ought gnotg to be regarded as han evilh.
The consumer, indeed, must pay for it; but cheapness of goods is
desirable only when the cause of it is that their production costs
little labour, and not when occasioned by that labour’s being ill
remunerated. It may appear, iindeedi, at first sight, that the high
wages of the type-founders (for example) are obtained at the general
cost of the labouring class. This high remuneration Edition: current;
Page: [931] either causes fewer persons to find employment in the trade,
or if not, must lead to the investment of more capital in it, at the
expense of other trades: in the first case, it throws an additional
number of labourers on the general market; in the second, it withdraws
from that market a portion of the demand: effects, both of which are
injurious to the working classes. Such, indeed, would really be the
result of a successful combination in a particular trade or trades, for
some time after its formationj; butj when it is a permanent thing, the
principles so often insisted upon in this treatise, show that it can
have no such effect. The habitual earnings of the working classes at
large can be affected by nothing but the habitual requirements of the
labouring people: these indeed may be altered, but while they remain the
same, wages never fall permanently below the standard of these
requirements, and kdo notk long remain above that standard. If there had
been no combinations in particular trades, and the wages of those trades
had never been kept above the lcommonl level, there is no reason mto
suppose that the ncommonn level would have been at all higher than it
now is. There would merely have been a ogreatero number of people
altogether, and a smaller number of exceptions to the ordinary low rate
of wages.

pIf, therefore, no improvement were to be hoped for in the general
circumstances of the working classes, the success of a portion of them,
however small, in keeping their wages by combination above the market
rate, would be wholly a matter of satisfaction. But when the elevation
of the character and condition of the entire body has at last become a
thing not beyond the reach of rational effort, it is time that the
better paid classes of skilled artisans should seek their own advantage
in common with, and not by the exclusion of, their fellow-labourers.
While they continue to fix their hopes on hedging themselves in against
competition, and protecting their own wages by shutting out others from
access to their employment, nothing better can be expected from them
than that total absence of any large and generous aims, that almost open
disregard of all other objects than high wages and little work for their
own small body, which were so deplorably evident in the proceedings and
manifestoes of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers during their
qquarrel with their employers. Success, even if attainable, in raising
up a protected class of working people, would now be a hindrance,
instead of a help, to the emancipation of the working classes at large.

But though combinations to keep up wages are seldom effectual, and
Edition: current; Page: [932] when effectual, are, for the reasons which
I have assigned, seldom desirable, the right of making the attempt is
one which cannot be refused to any portion of the working population
without great injustice, or without the probability of fatally
misleading them respecting the circumstances which determine their
condition. So long as combinations to raise wages were prohibited by
law, the law appeared to the operatives to be the real cause of the low
wages which there was no denying that it had done its best to produce.
Experience of strikes has been the best teacher of the labouring classes
on the subject of the relation between wages and the demand and supply
of labour: and it is most important that this course of instruction
should not be disturbed.

rIt is a great error to condemn, per se and absolutely, either trades
unions or the collective action of strikes. sEven assuming that a strike
must inevitably fails whenever it attempts to raise wages above that
market rate which is tfixedt by the demand and usupply;u demand and
supply are not physical agencies, which thrust a given amount of wages
into a labourer’s hand without the participation of his own will and
actions. The market rate is not fixed for him by some self-acting
instrument, but is the result of bargaining between human beings—of what
Adam Smith calls “the higgling of the market;”[*] and those who do not
“higgle” will long continue to pay, even over a counter, more than the
market price for their purchases. Still more might poor labourers who
have to do with rich employers, remain long without the amount of wages
which the demand for their labour would justify, unless, in vernacular
phrase, they stood out for it: and how can they stand out for terms
without organized concert? What chance would any labourer have, who
struck singly for an advance of wages? How could he even know whether
the state of the market admitted of a rise, except by consultation with
his fellows, naturally leading to concerted action? I do not hesitate to
say that associations of labourers, of a nature similar to trades
unions, far from being a hindrance to a free market for labour, are the
necessary instrumentality of that free market; the indispensable means
of enabling the sellers of labour to take due care of their own
interests under a system of competition. There is an ulterior
consideration of much importance, to which attention was for the first
time drawn by vProfessorv Fawcett, in an article in the Westminster
Review.[†] Experience has at length enabled the more intelligent trades
to take a tolerably correct Edition: current; Page: [933] measure of the
circumstances on which the success of a strike for an advance of wages
depends. The workmen are now nearly as well informed as the master, of
the state of the market for his commodities; they can calculate his
gains and his expenses, they know when his trade is or is not
prosperous, and only when it is, are they ever again likely to strike
for higher wages; which wages their known readiness to strike makes
their employers for the most part willing, in that case, to concede. The
tendency, therefore, of this state of things is to make a rise of wages
in any particular trade usually consequent upon a rise of profits,
which, as Mr. Fawcett observes, is a commencement of that regular
participation of the labourers in the profits derived from their labour,
every tendency to which, for the reasons stated in a previous chapter,*
it is so important to encourage, since to it we have chiefly to look for
any radical improvement in the social and economical relations between
labour and capital. Strikes, therefore, and the trade societies which
render strikes possible, are for these various reasons not a
mischievous, but on the contrary, a valuable part of the existing
machinery of society.pr

wIt is, however, an indispensable condition xof tolerating combinations,
that theyx should be voluntary. No severity, necessary to the purpose,
is too great to be employed against attempts to compel workmen to join a
union, or take part in a strike by threats or violence. Mere moral
compulsion, by the expression of opinion, the law ought not to interfere
with; it belongs to more enlightened opinion to restrain it, by
rectifying the moral sentiments of the people. Other questions arise
when the combination, being voluntary, proposes to itself objects really
contrary to the public good. High wages and short hours are generally
good objects, or, at all events, may be soy: buty in many trades unions,
it is among the rules that there shall be no task work, or no difference
of pay between the most expert workmen and the most unskilful, or that
no member of the union shall earn more than a certain sum per week, in
order that there may be more employment for the restz; and the abolition
of piece work, under more or less of modification, held a conspicuous
place among the demands of the Amalgamated Societyz. These are
combinations to effect objects which are pernicious. Their success, even
when only partial, is a public mischief; and Edition: current; Page:
[934] were it complete, would be equal in magnitude to almost any of the
evils arising from bad aeconomicala legislation. Hardly anything worse
can be said of the worst laws on the subject of bindustry and its
remuneration, consistent with the personal freedom of the labourerb,
than that they place the energetic and the idle, the skilful and the
incompetent, on a level: and thisc, in so far as it is in itself
possible, it is the direct tendencyc of the regulations of these unions
to do. dIt does not, however, follow as a consequence thatd the law
would be warranted in making the formation of such associations illegal
and punishablee. Independently of all considerations of constitutional
liberty, the best interests of the human race fimperatively require that
all economical experiments, voluntarily undertaken, should have the
fullest licence, and that force and fraud should be the only means of
attempting to benefit themselves, which are interdicted to the less
fortunate classes of the community.*e

§ 6. [Restraints on opinion or on its publication] Among the modes of
undue exercise of the power of government, on which I have commented in
this chapter, I have included only such as rest on theories which have
Edition: current; Page: [935] still more or less of footing in the most
enlightened countries. I have not spoken of some which have done still
greater mischief in times not long past, but which are now generally
given up, at least in theory, though enough of them still remains in
practice to make it impossible as yet to class them among exploded
errors.

The notion, for example, that a government should choose opinions for
the people, and should not suffer any doctrines in politics, morals,
law, or religion, but such as it approves, to be printed or publicly
professed, may be said to be altogether abandoned as a general thesis.
It is now well understood that a régime of this sort is fatal to all
prosperity, even of an economical kind: that the human mind when
prevented either by fear of the law or by fear of opinion from
exercising its faculties freely on the most important subjects, acquires
a general torpidity and imbecility, by which, when they reach a certain
point, it is disqualified from making any considerable advances even in
the common affairs of life, and which, when greater still, make it
gradually lose even its previous attainments. There cannot be a more
decisive example than Spain and Portugal, afor two centuries after the
Reformationa. The decline of those countries in national greatness, and
even in material civilization, while almost all the other nations of
Europe were uninterruptedly advancing, has been ascribed to various
causes, but there is one which lies at the foundation of them all: the
Holy Inquisition, and the system of mental slavery of which it is the
symbol.

Yet although these truths are very widely recognised, and freedom both
of opinion and of discussion is admitted as an axiom in all free
countries, this apparent liberality and tolerance has acquired so little
of the authority of a principle, that it is always ready to give way to
the dread or horror inspired by some particular sort of opinions. Within
the last bfifteen or twentyb years several individuals have suffered
imprisonment, for the public profession, sometimes in a very temperate
manner, of cdisbelief in religionc; and it is probable that both the
public and the government, at the first panic which arises on the
subject of Chartism or Communism, will fly to similar means for checking
the propagation of democratic or antiproperty doctrines. In this
country, however, the effective restraints on mental freedom proceed
much less from the law or the government, than from the intolerant
temper of the national mind; arising no longer from even dasd
respectable a source as bigotry or fanaticism, but rather from the
general habit, both in opinion and conduct, of making adherence to
custom the rule of life, and enforcing it, by social penalties, against
all persons who, without a party to back them, assert their individual
independence.

Edition: current; Page: [936]


CHAPTER XI: Of the Grounds and Limits of the Laisser-Faire or Non-Interference Principle

§ 1. [Governmental intervention distinguished into authoritative and
unauthoritative] We have now reached the last part of our undertaking;
the discussion, so far as suited to this treatise (that is, so far as it
is a question of principle, not detail) of the limits of the province of
government: the question, to what objects governmental intervention in
the affairs of society may or should extend, over and above those which
necessarily appertain to it. No subject has been more keenly contested
in the present age: the contest, however, has chiefly ataken placea
round certain select points, with only flying excursions bintob the rest
of the field. Those indeed who have discussed any particular question of
government interference, such as state education (spiritual or secular),
regulation of hours of labour, a public provision for the poor, &c.,
have often dealt largely in general arguments, far outstretching the
special application made of them, and have shown a sufficiently strong
bias either in favour of letting things alone, or in favour of meddling;
but have seldom declared, or apparently decided in their own minds, how
far they would carry either principle. The supporters of interference
have been content with asserting a general right and duty on the part of
government to intervene, wherever its intervention would be useful: and
when those who have been called the laisser-faire school have attempted
any definite limitation of the province of government, they have usually
restricted it to the protection of person and property against force and
fraud; a definition to which neither they nor any one else can
deliberately adhere, since it excludes, as has been shown in a preceding
chapter,* some of the most indispensable and unanimously recognised of
the duties of government.

Edition: current; Page: [937]
Without professing entirely to supply this deficiency of a general
theory, on a question which does not, as I conceive, admit of any
universal solution, I shall attempt to afford some little aid towards
the resolution of this class of questions as they arise, by examining,
in the most general point of view in which the subject can be
considered, what are the advantages, and what the evils or
inconveniences, of government interference.

We must set out by distinguishing between two kinds of intervention by
the government, which, though they may relate to the same subject,
differ widely in their nature and effects, and require, for their
justification, motives of a very different degree of urgency. The
intervention may extend to controlling the free agency of individuals.
Government may interdict all persons from doing certain things; or from
doing them without its authorization; or may prescribe to them certain
things to be done, or a certain manner of doing things which it is left
optional with them to do or to abstain from. This is the authoritative
interference of government. There is another kind of intervention which
is not authoritative: when a government, instead of issuing a command
and enforcing it by penalties, adopts the course so seldom resorted to
by governments, and of which such important use might be made, that of
giving advice, and promulgating information; or when, leaving
individuals free to use their own means of pursuing any object of
general interest, the government, not meddling with them, but not
trusting the object solely to their care, establishes, side by side with
their arrangements, an agency of its own for a like purpose. Thus, it is
one thing to maintain a Church Establishment, and another to refuse
toleration to other religions, or to persons professing no religion. It
is one thing to provide schools or colleges, and another to require that
no person shall act as an instructor of youth without a government
licence. There might be a national bank, or a government manufactory,
without any monopoly against private banks and manufactories. There
might be a post-office, without penalties against the conveyance of
letters by other means. There may be a corps of government engineers for
civil purposes, while the profession of a civil engineer is free to be
adopted by every one. There may be public hospitals, without any
restriction upon private medical or surgical practice.

§ 2. [Objections to government intervention—the compulsory character of
the intervention itself, or of the levy of funds to support it] It is
evident, even at first sight, that the authoritative form of government
intervention has a much more limited sphere of legitimate action than
the other. It requires a much stronger necessity to justify it in any
case; while there are large departments of human life from which it must
be unreservedly and imperiously excluded. Whatever theory we adopt
respecting the Edition: current; Page: [938] foundation of the social
union, and under whatever political institutions we live, there is a
circle around every individual human being, which no government, be it
that of one, of a few, or of the many, ought to be permitted to
overstep: there is a part of the life of every person who has come to
years of discretion, within which the individuality of that person ought
to reign uncontrolled either by any other individual or by the public
collectively. That there is, or ought to be, some space in human
existence thus entrenched aarounda, and sacred from authoritative
intrusion, no one who professes the smallest regard to human freedom or
dignity will call in question: the point to be determined is, where the
limit should be placed; how large a province of human life this reserved
territory should include. I apprehend that it ought to include all that
part which concerns only the life, whether inward or outward, of the
individual, and does not affect the interests of others, or affects them
only through the moral influence of example. With respect to the domain
of the inward consciousness, the thoughts and feelings, and as much of
external conduct as is personal only, involving no consequences, none at
least of a painful or injurious kind, to other people; I hold that it is
allowable in all, and in the more thoughtful and cultivated often a
duty, to assert and promulgate, with all the force they are capable of,
their opinion of what is good or bad, admirable or contemptible, but not
to compel others to conform to that opinion; whether the force used is
that of extra-legal coercion, or exerts itself by means of the law.

Even in those portions of conduct which do affect the interest of
others, the onus of making out a case always lies on the defenders of
legal prohibitions. It is not a merely constructive or presumptive
injury to others, which will justify the interference of law with
individual freedom. To be prevented from doing what one is inclined to,
or from acting according to one’s own judgment of what is desirable, is
not only always irksome, but always tends, pro tanto, to starve the
development of some portion of the bodily or mental faculties, either
sensitive or active; and unless the conscience of the individual goes
freely with the legal restraint, it partakes, either in a great or in a
small degree, of the degradation of slavery. Scarcely any degree of
utility, short of absolute necessity, will justify a prohibitory
regulation, unless it can balsob be made to recommend itself to the
general conscience; unless persons of ordinary good intentions either
believe already, or can be induced to believe, that the thing prohibited
is a thing which they ought not to wish to do.

It is otherwise with governmental interferences which do not restrain
individual free agency. When a government provides means for fulfilling
a certain end, leaving individuals free to avail themselves of different
means Edition: current; Page: [939] if in their opinion preferable,
there is no infringement of liberty, no irksome or degrading restraint.
One of the principal objections to government interference is then
absent. There is, however, in almost all forms of government agency, one
thing which is compulsory; the provision of the pecuniary means. These
are derived from taxation; or, if existing in the form of an endowment
derived from public property, they are still the cause of as much
compulsory taxation as the sale or the annual proceeds of the property
would enable to be dispensed with.* And the objection necessarily
attaching to compulsory contributions, is almost always greatly
aggravated by the expensive precautions and onerous restrictions, which
are indispensable to prevent evasion of a compulsory tax.

§ 3. [Objections to government intervention—increase of the power and
influence of government] A second general objection to government
agency, is that every increase of the functions devolving on the
government is an increase of its power, both in the form of authority,
and still more, in the indirect form of influence. The importance of
this consideration, in respect to political freedom, has in general been
quite sufficiently recognised, at least in England; but many, in latter
times, have been prone to think that limitation of the powers of the
government is only essential when the government itself is badly
constituted; when it does not represent the people, but is the organ of
a class, or coalition of classes: and that a government of sufficiently
popular constitution might be trusted with any amount of power over the
nation, since its power would be only that of the nation over itself.
This might be true, if the nation, in such cases, did not practically
mean a mere majority of the nation, and if minorities were only capable
of oppressing, but not of being oppressed. Experience, however, proves
that the depositaries of power who are mere delegates of the people,
that is of a majority, are quite as ready (when they think they can
count on popular support) as any organs of oligarchy, to assume
arbitrary power, and encroach unduly on the liberty of private life. The
public collectively is abundantly ready to impose, not only its
generally narrow views of its interests, but its abstract opinions, and
even its tastes, as laws binding upon individuals. And athea present
civilization tends so strongly to make the Edition: current; Page: [940]
power of persons acting in masses the only substantial power in society,
that there never was more necessity for surrounding individual
independence of thought, speech, and conduct, with the most powerful
defences, in order to maintain that originality of mind and
individuality of character, which are the only source of any real
progress, and of most of the qualities which make the human race much
superior to any herd of animals. Hence it is no less important in a
democratic than in any other government, that all tendency on the part
of public authorities to stretch their interference, and assume a power
of any sort which can easily be dispensed with, should be regarded with
unremitting jealousy. Perhaps this bis even moreb important in a
democracy than in any other form of political society; because where
public opinion is sovereign, an individual who is oppressed by the
sovereign does not, as in most other states of things, find cac rival
power to which he can appeal for reliefd, or, at all events, for
sympathyd.

§ 4. [Objections to government intervention—increase of the occupations
and responsibilities of government] A third general objection to
government agency, rests on the principle of the division of labour.
Every additional function undertaken by the government, is a fresh
occupation imposed upon a body already overcharged with duties. A
natural consequence is that most things are ill done; much not done at
all, because the government is not able to do it without delays which
are fatal to its purpose; that the more troublesome, and less showy, of
the functions undertaken, are postponed or neglected, and an excuse is
always ready for the neglect; while the heads of the administration have
their minds so fully taken up with official details, in however
perfunctory a manner superintended, that they have no time or thought to
spare for the great interests of the state, and the preparation of
enlarged measures of social improvement.

But these inconveniences, though real and serious, result much more from
the bad organization of governments, than from the extent aanda variety
of the duties undertaken by them. Government is not a name for some one
functionary, or definite number of functionaries: there may be almost
any amount of division of labour within the administrative body itself.
The evil in question is felt in great magnitude under some of the
governments bofb the Continent, where six or eight men, living at the
capital and known by the name of ministers, demand that the whole public
business of the country shall pass, or be supposed to pass, under their
individual eye. But the inconvenience would be reduced to a very
manageable compass, in a country in which there was a proper
distribution of Edition: current; Page: [941] functions between the
central and local officers of government, and in which the central body
was divided into a sufficient number of departments. When Parliament
thought it expedient to confer on the government an inspecting and
partially controlling authority over railways, it did not add railways
to the department of the Home Minister, but created a Railway Board.
When it determined to have a central superintending authority for pauper
administration, it established the Poor Law Commission. There are few
countries in which a greater number of functions are discharged by
public officers, than in some states of the American Union, particularly
the New England States: but the division of labour in public business is
extreme; most of these officers being not even amenable to any common
superior, but performing their duties freely, under the double check of
election by their townsmen, and civil as well as criminal responsibility
to the tribunals.

It is, no doubt, indispensable to good government that the chiefs of the
administration, whether permanent or temporary, should extend a
commanding, though general, view over the ensemble of all the interests
confided, in any degree, to the responsibility of the central power. But
with a skilful internal organization of the administrative machine,
leaving to subordinates, and as far as possible, to local subordinates,
not only the execution, but to a great degree the control, of details;
holding them accountable for the results of their acts rather than for
the acts themselves, except where these come within the cognizance of
the tribunals; taking the most effectual securities for honest and
capable appointments; opening a broad path to promotion from the
inferior degrees of the administrative scale to the superior; leaving,
at each step, to the functionary, a wider range in the origination of
measures, so that, in the highest grade of all, deliberation cmightc be
concentrated on the great collective interests of the country in each
department; if all this were done, the government would not probably be
overburthened by any business, in other respects fit to be undertaken by
it; though the overburthening would remain as a serious addition to the
inconveniences incurred by its undertaking any which was unfit.

§ 5. [Objections to government intervention—superior efficiency of
private agency, owing to stronger interest in the work] But though a
better organization of governments would greatly diminish the force of
the objection to the mere multiplication of their duties, it would still
remain true that in all the more advanced communities, the great
majority of things are worse done by the intervention of government,
than the individuals most interested in the matter would do them, or
cause them to be done, if left to themselves. The grounds of this truth
are expressed with Edition: current; Page: [942] tolerable exactness in
the popular dictum, that people understand their own business and their
own interests better, and care for them more, than the government does,
or can be expected to do. This maxim holds true throughout the greatest
part of the business of life, and wherever it is true we ought to
condemn every kind of government intervention that conflicts with it.
The inferiority of government agency, for example, in any of the common
operations of industry or commerce, is proved by the fact, that it is
hardly ever able to maintain itself in equal competition with individual
agency, where the individuals possess the requisite degree of industrial
enterprise, and can command the necessary assemblage of means. All the
facilities which a government enjoys of access to information; all the
means which it possesses of remunerating, and therefore of commanding,
the best available talent in the market—are not an equivalent for the
one great disadvantage of an inferior interest in the result.

It must be remembered, besides, that even if a government were superior
in intelligence and knowledge to any single individual in the nation, it
must be inferior to all the individuals of the nation taken together. It
can neither possess in itself, nor enlist in its service, more than a
portion of the acquirements and capacities which the country contains,
applicable to any given purpose. There must be many persons equally
qualified for the work with those whom the government employs, even if
it selects its instruments with no reference to any consideration but
their fitness. Now these are the very persons into whose hands, in the
cases of most common occurrence, a system of individual agency naturally
tends to throw the work, because they are capable of doing it better
aora on cheaper terms than any other person. So far as this is the case,
it is evident that government, by excluding or even by superseding
individual agency, either substitutes a less qualified instrumentality
for one better qualified, or at any rate substitutes its own mode of
accomplishing the work, for all the variety of modes which would be
tried by a number of equally qualified persons aiming at the same end; a
competition by many degrees more propitious to the progress of
improvement, than any uniformity of system.

§ 6. [Objections to government intervention—importance of cultivating
habits of collective action in the people] I have reserved for the last
place one of the strongest of the reasons against the extension of
government agency. Even if the government could comprehend within
itself, in each department, all the most eminent intellectual capacity
and active talent of the nation, it would not be the less desirable that
the conduct of a large portion of the affairs of athea society should be
left in the hands of the Edition: current; Page: [943] persons
immediately interested in them. The business of life is an essential
part of the practical education of a people; without which, book and
school instruction, though most necessary and salutary, does not suffice
to qualify them for conduct, and for the adaptation of means to ends.
Instruction is only one of the desiderata of mental improvement;
another, almost as indispensable, is a vigorous exercise of the active
energies; labour, contrivance, judgment, self-control: and the natural
stimulus to these is the difficulties of life. This doctrine is not to
be confounded with the complacent optimism, which represents the bevilsb
of life as desirable things, because they call forth qualities adapted
to combat with cevilsc. It is only because the difficulties exist, that
the qualities which combat with them are of any value. As practical
beings it is our business to free human life from as many as possible of
its difficulties, and not to keep up a stock of them as hunters preserve
game, for the exercise of pursuing it. But since the need of active
talent and practical judgment in the affairs of life can only be
diminished, and not, even on the most favourable supposition, done away
with, it is important that those endowments should be cultivated not
merely in a select few, but in all, and that the cultivation should be
more varied and complete than most persons are able to find in the
narrow sphere of their merely individual interests. A people among whom
there is no habit of spontaneous action for a collective interest—who
look habitually to their government to command or prompt them in all
matters of joint concern—who expect to have everything done for them,
except what can be made an affair of mere habit and routine—have their
faculties only half developed; their education is defective in one of
its most important branches.

Not only is the cultivation of the active faculties by exercise,
diffused through the whole community, in itself one of the most valuable
of national possessions: it is rendered, not less, but more, necessary,
dwhend a high degree of that indispensable culture is systematically
kept up in the chiefs and functionaries of the state. There cannot be a
combination of circumstances more dangerous to human welfare, than that
in which intelligence and talent are maintained at a high standard
within a governing corporation, but starved and discouraged outside the
pale. Such a system, more completely than any other, embodies the idea
of despotism, by arming with intellectual superiority as an additional
weapon, those who have already the legal power. It approaches as nearly
as the organic difference between human beings and other animals admits,
to the government of sheep by their shepherd, without anything like so
strong an interest as the shepherd has in the thriving condition of the
flock. The only security against political Edition: current; Page: [944]
slavery, is the check maintained over governors, by the diffusion of
intelligence, activity, and public spirit among the governed. Experience
proves the extreme difficulty of permanently keeping up a sufficiently
high standard of those qualities; a difficulty which increases, as the
advance of civilization and security removes one after another of the
hardships, embarrassments, and dangers against which individuals had
formerly no resource but in their own strength, skill, and courage. It
is therefore of supreme importance that all classes of the community,
down to the lowest, should have much to do for themselves; that as great
a demand should be made upon their intelligence and virtue as it is in
any respect equal to; that the government should not only leave as efare
as possible to their own faculties the conduct of whatever concerns
themselves alone, but should suffer them, or rather encourage them, to
manage as many as possible of their joint concerns by voluntary
co-operation; since fthisf discussion and management of collective
interests is the great school of that public spirit, and the great
source of that intelligence of public affairs, which are always regarded
as the distinctive character of the public of free countries.

A democratic constitution, not supported by democratic institutions in
detail, but confined to the central government, not only is not
political freedom, but often creates a spirit precisely the reverse,
carrying down to the lowest grade in society the desire and ambition of
political domination. In some countries the desire of the people is for
not being tyrannized over, but in others it is merely for an equal
chance to everybody of tyrannizing. Unhappily this last state of the
desires is fully as natural to mankind as the former, and in many of the
conditions even of civilized humanity, is far more largely exemplified.
In proportion as the people are accustomed to manage their affairs by
their own active intervention, instead of leaving them to the
government, their desires will turn to repelling tyranny, rather than to
tyrannizing: while in proportion as all real initiative and direction
resides in the government, and individuals habitually feel and act as
under its perpetual tutelage, popular institutions develope in them not
the desire of freedom, but an unmeasured appetite for place and power;
diverting the intelligence and activity of the country from its
principal business, to a wretched competition for the selfish prizes and
the petty vanities of office.

§ 7. [Laisser-faire the general rule] The preceding are the principal
reasons, of a general character, in favour of restricting to the
narrowest compass the intervention of a public authority in the business
of the community: and few will dispute the more than sufficiency of
these reasons, to throw, in every instance, the burthen of making out a
strong case, not on those who resist, but on those who recommend,
government interference. Edition: current; Page: [945] Laisser-faire, in
short, should be the general practice: every departure from it, unless
required by some great good, is a certain evil.

The degree in which the maxim, even in the cases to which it is most
manifestly applicable, has heretofore been infringed by governments,
future ages will probably have difficulty in crediting. Some idea may be
formed of it from the description aofa M. Dunoyer* of the restraints
imposed on the operations of manufacture under the old government of
France, by the meddling and regulating spirit of legislation.

“La société exerçait sur la fabrication la juridiction la plus illimitée
et la plus arbitraire: elle disposait sans scrupule des facultés des
fabricants; elle décidait qui pourrait travailler, quelle chose on
pourrait faire, quels matériaux on devrait employer, quels procédés il
faudrait suivre, quelles formes on donnerait aux produits, etc. Il ne
suffisait pas de faire bien, de faire mieux, il fallait faire suivant
les règles. Qui ne connaît ce règlement de 1670, qui préscrivait de
saisir et de clouer au poteau, avec le nom des auteurs, les marchandises
non conformes aux règles tracées, et qui, à la seconde récidive, voulait
que les fabricants y fussent attachés eux-mêmes? Il ne s’agissait pas de
consulter le goût des consommateurs, mais de se conformer aux volontés
de la loi. Des légions d’inspecteurs, de commissaires, de contrôleurs,
de jurés, de gardes, étaient chargés de les faire exécuter; on brisait
les métiers, on brûlait les produits qui n’y étaient pas conformes: les
améliorations étaient punies; on mettait les inventeurs à l’amende. On
soumettait à des règles différentes la fabrication des objets destinés à
la consommation intérieure et celle des produits destinés au commerce
étranger. Un artisan n’était pas le maître de choisir le lieu de son
établissement, ni de travailler en toute saison, ni de travailler pour
tout le monde. Il existe un décret du 30 Mars 1700, qui borne à dix-huit
villes le nombre des lieux où l’on pourra faire des bas au métier; un
arrêt du 18 Juin 1723 enjoint aux fabricants de Rouen de suspendre leurs
travaux du 1er Juillet au 15 Septembre, afin de faciliter ceux de la
récolte; Louis XIV., quand il voulut entreprendre la colonnade du
Louvre, défendit aux particuliers d’employer des ouvriers sans sa
permission, sous peine de 10,000 livres d’amende, et aux ouvriers de
travailler pour les particuliers, sous peine, pour la première fois, de
la prison, et pour la seconde, des galères.”

That these and similar regulations were not a dead letter, and that the
officious and vexatious meddling was prolonged down to the French
Revolution, we have the testimony of Roland, the Girondist minister.† “I
have seen,” says he, “eighty, ninety, a hundred pieces of cotton or
woollen stuff Edition: current; Page: [946] cut up, and completely
destroyed. I have witnessed similar scenes every week for a number of
years. I have seen manufactured goods confiscated; heavy fines laid on
the manufacturers; some pieces of fabric were burnt in public places,
and at the hours of market: others were fixed to the pillory, with the
name of the manufacturer inscribed upon them, and he himself was
threatened with the pillory, in case of a second offence. All this was
done under my eyes, at Rouen, in conformity with existing regulations,
or ministerial orders. What crime deserved so cruel a punishment? Some
defects in the materials employed, or in the texture of the fabric, or
even in some of the threads of the warp.

“I have frequently seen manufacturers visited by a band of satellites
who put all in confusion in their establishments, spread terror in their
families, cut the stuffs from the frames, tore off the warp from the
looms, and carried them away as proofs of infringement; the
manufacturers were summoned, tried, and condemned: their goods
confiscated; copies of their judgment of confiscation posted up in every
public place; fortune, reputation, credit, all was lost and destroyed.
And for what offence? Because they had made of worsted, a kind of cloth
called shag, such as the English used to manufacture, and even sell in
France, while the French regulations stated that that kind of cloth
should be made with mohair. I have seen other manufacturers treated in
the same way, because they had made camlets of a particular width, used
in England and Germany, for which there was a great demand from Spain,
Portugal, and other countries, and from several parts of France, while
the French regulations prescribed other widths for camlets.”

The time is gone by, when such applications as these of the principle of
“paternal government” would be attempted, in even the least enlightened
country of the European commonwealth of nations. In such cases as those
cited, all the general objections to government interference are valid,
and several of them in nearly their highest degree. But we must now turn
to the second part of our task, and direct our attention to cases, in
which some of those general objections are altogether absent, while
those which can never be got rid of entirely, are overruled by
counter-considerations of still greater importance.

We have observed that, as a general rule, the business of life is better
performed when those who have an immediate interest in it are left to
take their own course, uncontrolled either by the mandate of the law or
by the meddling of any public functionary. The persons, or some of the
persons, who do the work, are likely to be better judges than the
government, of the means of attaining the particular end at which they
aim. Were we to suppose, what is not very probable, that the government
has possessed itself of the best knowledge which had been acquired up to
a given time by the Edition: current; Page: [947] persons most skilled
in the occupation; even then, the individual bagents haveb so much
stronger and more direct an interest in the result, that the means are
far more likely to be improved and perfected if left to ctheirc
uncontrolled choice. But if the workman is generally the best selector
of means, can it be affirmed with the same universality, that the
consumer, or person served, is the most competent judge of the end? Is
the buyer always qualified to judge of the commodity? If not, the
presumption in favour of the competition of the market does not apply to
the case; and if the commodity be one, in the quality of which society
has much at stake, the balance of advantages may be in favour of some
mode dandd degree of intervention, by the authorized representatives of
the collective interest of the state.

§ 8. [Large exceptions to laisser-faire. Cases in which the consumer is
an incompetent judge of the commodity. Education] Now, the proposition
that the consumer is a competent judge of the commodity, can be admitted
only with numerous abatements and exceptions. He is generally the best
judge (though even this is not true universally) of the material objects
produced for his use. These are destined to supply some physical want,
or gratify some taste or inclination, respecting which wants or
inclinations there is no appeal from the person who feels them; or they
are the means and appliances of some occupation, for the use of the
persons engaged in it, who may be presumed to be judges of the things
required in their own habitual employment. But there are other things,
of the worth of which the demand of the market is by no means a test;
things of which the utility does not consist in ministering to
inclinations, nor in serving the daily uses of life, and the want of
which is least felt where the need is greatest. This is peculiarly true
of those things which are chiefly useful as tending to raise the
character of human beings. The uncultivated cannot be competent judges
of cultivation. Those who most need to be made wiser and better, usually
desire it least, and if they desired it, would be incapable of finding
the way to it by their own lights. It will continually happen, on the
voluntary system, that, the end not being desired, the means will not be
provided at all, or that, the persons requiring improvement having an
imperfect or altogether erroneous conception of what they want, the
supply called forth by the demand of the market will be anything but
what is really required. Now any well-intentioned and tolerably
civilized government may think, without presumption, that it does or
ought to possess a degree of cultivation above the average of the
community which it rules, and that it should therefore be capable of
offering better education and better instruction to Edition: current;
Page: [948] the people, than the greater number of them would
spontaneously ademanda. Education, therefore, is one of those things
which it is admissible in principle that a government should provide for
the people. The case is one to which the reasons of the non-interference
principle do not necessarily or universally extend.*

With regard to elementary education, the exception to ordinary rules
may, I conceive, justifiably be carried still further. There are certain
primary elements and means of knowledge, which it is in the highest
degree desirable that all human beings born into the community should
acquire during childhood. If their parents, or those on whom they
depend, have the power of obtaining for them this instruction, and fail
to do it, they commit a double breach of duty, towards the children
themselves, and towards the members of the community generally, who are
all liable to suffer seriously from the consequences of ignorance and
want of education in their fellow-citizens. It is therefore an allowable
exercise of the powers of government, to impose on parents the legal
obligation of giving elementary Edition: current; Page: [949]
instruction to children. This, however, cannot fairly be done, without
taking measures to insure that such instruction shall be always
accessible to them, either gratuitously or at a trifling expense.

It may indeed be objected that the education of children is one of those
expenses which parents, even of the labouring class, ought to defray;
that it is desirable that they should feel it incumbent on them to
provide by their own means for the fulfilment of their duties, and that
by giving education at the cost of others, just as much as by giving
subsistence, the standard of necessary wages is proportionally lowered,
and the springs of exertion and self-restraint in so much relaxed. bThis
argument could, at best, be only validb if the question were that of
substituting a public provision for what individuals would otherwise do
for themselves; if all parents in the labouring class recognised and
practised the duty of giving instruction to their children at their own
expensec. But inasmuch asc parents do not practise this duty, and do not
include education among those necessary expenses which their wages must
provide for, dtherefored the general rate of wages is not high enough to
bear those expenses, and ethey must be borne from some other source. And
this is not one of the cases in which the tender of help perpetuates the
state of things which renders help necessary. Instruction, when it is
really such, does not enervate, but strengthens as well as enlarges the
active faculties: in whatever manner acquired, its effect on the mind is
favourable to the spirit of independence: and when, unless had
gratuitously, it would not be had at all, help in this form has the
opposite tendency to that which in so many other cases makes it
objectionable; it is help towards doing without help.

In England, and most European countries, elementary instruction cannot
be paid for, at its full cost, from the common wages of unskilled
labour, and would not if it could. The alternative, therefore, is not
between government and private speculation, but between a government
provision and voluntary charity: between interference by government, and
interference by associations of individuals, subscribing their own money
for the purpose, like the two great School Societies. It is, of course,
not desirable that anything should be done by funds derived from
compulsory taxation, which is already sufficiently well done by
individual liberality. How far this is the case with school instruction,
is, in each particular instance, a question of fact. The education
provided in this country on the voluntary principle has of late been so
much discussed, that it is needless in this place to criticise it
minutely, and I shall merely express my conviction, that even in
quantity Edition: current; Page: [950] it is, and is likely to remain,
altogether insufficient, while in quality, though with some slight
tendency to improvement, it is never good except by some rare accident,
and generally so bad as to be little more than nominal. I hold it
therefore the duty of the government to supply the defect, by fgiving
pecuniary support to elementary schools, such as to render themf
accessible to all the children of the poor, either freely, or for a
payment too inconsiderable to be sensibly feltg.

One thing must be strenuously insisted on; that the government must
claim no monopoly for its education, either in the lower or in the
higher branches; must exert neither authority nor influence to induce
the people to resort to its teachers in preference to others, and must
confer no peculiar advantages on those who have been instructed by them.
Though the government teachers will probably be superior to the average
of private instructors, they will not embody all the knowledge and
sagacity to be found in all instructors taken together, and it is
desirable to leave open as many roads as possible to the desired end.
hIt is not endurableh that a government should, either de jure or de
facto, have a complete control over the education of the ipeople. To
possess such a control, and actually exert it, is to be jdespoticj. A
government which can mould the opinions and sentiments of the people
from their youth upwards, can do with them whatever it pleases. Though a
government, therefore, may, and in many cases ought to, establish
schools and colleges, it must neither compel nor bribe any person to
come to them; nor ought the power of individuals to set up rival
establishments, to depend in any degree upon its authorization. It
kwouldk be justified in requiring from all the people that they shall
possess instruction in certain things, but not in prescribing to them
how or from whom they shall obtain it.

§ 9. [Case of persons exercising power over others. Protection of
children and young persons; of the lower animals. Case of women not
analogous] In the matter of education, the intervention of government is
justifiable, because the case is not one in which the interest and
judgment of the consumer are a sufficient security for the goodness of
the commodity. Let us now consider another class of cases, where there
is no person in the situation of a consumer, and where the interest and
judgment to be relied Edition: current; Page: [951] on are those of the
agent himself; as in the conduct of any business in which he is
exclusively interested, or in entering into any contract or engagement
by which he himself is to be bound.

The ground of the practical principle of non-interference must here be,
that most persons take a juster and more intelligent view of their own
interest, and of the means of promoting it, than can either be
prescribed to them by a general enactment of the legislature, or pointed
out in the particular case by a public functionary. The maxim is
unquestionably sound as a general rule; but there is no difficulty in
perceiving some very large and conspicuous exceptions to it. These may
be classed under several heads.

First:—The individual who is presumed to be the best judge of his own
interests may be incapable of judging or acting for himself; may be a
lunatic, an idiot, an infant: or though not wholly incapable, may be of
immature years and judgment. In this case the foundation of the
laisser-faire principle breaks down entirely. The person most interested
is not the best judge of the matter, nor a competent judge at all.
Insane persons are everywhere regarded as proper objects of the care of
the state.* In the case of children and young persons, it is common to
say, that though they cannot judge for themselves, they have their
parents or other relatives to judge for them. But this removes the
question into a different category; making it no longer a question
whether the government should interfere with individuals in the
direction of their own conduct and interests, but whether it should
leave absolutely in their power the conduct and interests of somebody
else. Edition: current; Page: [952] Parental power is as susceptible of
abuse as any other power, and is, as a matter of fact, constantly
abused. If laws do not succeed in preventing parents from brutally
ill-treating, and even from murdering their children, far less ought it
to be presumed that the interests of children will never be sacrificed,
in more commonplace and less revolting ways, to the selfishness or the
aignorancea of their parents. Whatever it can be clearly seen that
parents ought to do or forbear for the interest of children, the law is
warranted, if it is able, in compelling to be done or forborne, and is
generally bound to do so. To take an example from the peculiar province
of political economy; it is right that children, and young persons not
yet arrived at maturity, should be protected, so far as the eye and hand
of the state can reach, from being over-worked. Labouring for too many
hours in the day, or on work beyond their strength, should not be
permitted to them, for if permitted it may always be compelled. Freedom
of contract, in the case of children, is but another word for freedom of
coercion. Education also, the best which circumstances admit of their
receiving, is not a thing which parents or relatives, from
indifferences, jealousy, or avarice, should have it in their power to
withhold.

The reasons for legal intervention in favour of children, apply not less
strongly to the case of those unfortunate slaves and victims of the most
brutal part of mankind, the lower animals. It is by the grossest
misunderstanding of the principles of liberty, that the infliction of
exemplary punishment on ruffianism practised towards these defenceless
creatures, has been treated as a meddling by government with things
beyond its province; an interference with domestic life. The domestic
life of domestic tyrants is one of the things which it is the most
imperative on the law to interfere with; and it is to be regretted that
metaphysical scruples respecting the nature and source of the authority
of government, should induce many warm supporters of laws against
cruelty to animals, to seek for a justification of such laws in the
incidental consequences of the indulgence of ferocious habits to the
interests of human beings, rather than in the intrinsic merits of the
case itself. What it would be the duty of a human being, possessed of
the requisite physical strength, to prevent by force if attempted in his
presence, it cannot be less incumbent on society generally to repress.
The existing laws of England on the subject are chiefly defective in the
trifling, often almost nominal, maximum, to which the penalty even in
the worst cases is limitedb.

Among those members of the community whose freedom of contract ought to
be controlled by the legislature for their own protection, on account
(it is said) of their dependent position, it is frequently proposed to
include Edition: current; Page: [953] women: and in the cexistingc
Factory dActsd, their labour, in common with that of young persons, has
been placed under peculiar restrictions. But the classing together, for
this and other purposes, of women and children, appears to me both
indefensible in principle and mischievous in practice. Children below a
certain age cannot judge or act for themselves; up to a considerably
greater age they are inevitably more or less disqualified for doing so;
but women are as capable as men of appreciating and managing their own
concerns, and the only hindrance to their doing so arises from the
injustice of their present social position. eWhene the law makes
everything which the wife acquires, the property of the husband, while
by compelling her to live with him it forces her to submit to almost any
amount of moral and even physical tyranny which he may choose to
inflict, there is some ground for regarding every act done by her as
done under coercion: but it is the great error of reformers and
philanthropists in our time, to nibble at the consequences of unjust
power, instead of redressing the injustice itself. If women had as
absolute a control as men have, over their own persons and their own
patrimony or acquisitions, there would be no plea for limiting their
hours of labouring for themselves, in order that they might have time to
labour for the husband, in what is called, by the advocates of
restriction, his home. Women employed in factories are the only women in
the labouring rank of life whose position is not that of slaves and
drudges; precisely because they cannot easily be compelled to work and
earn wages in factories against their will. For improving the condition
of women, it should, on the contrary, be an object to give them the
readiest access to independent industrial employment, instead of
closing, either entirely or partially, that which is already open to
them.

§ 10. [Case of contracts in perpetuity] A second exception to the
doctrine that individuals are the best judges of their own interest, is
when an individual attempts to adecidea irrevocably now, what will be
best for his interest at some future and distant time. The presumption
in favour of individual judgment is only legitimate, where the judgment
is grounded on actual, and especially on present, personal experience;
not where it is formed antecedently to experience, and not suffered to
be reversed even after experience has condemned it. When persons have
bound themselves by a contract, not simply to do some one thing, but to
continue doing something for ever or for a prolonged period, without any
power of revoking the engagement, the presumption which their
perseverance in that course of conduct would otherwise raise in favour
of its being advantageous to them, does not exist; and any such
presumption which can be grounded Edition: current; Page: [954] on their
having voluntarily entered into the contract, perhaps at an early age,
and without any real knowledge of what they undertook, is commonly next
to null. The practical maxim of leaving contracts free, is not
applicable without great limitations in case of engagements in
perpetuity; and the law should be extremely jealous of such engagements;
should refuse its sanction to them, when the obligations they impose are
such as the contracting party cannot be a competent judge of; if it ever
does sanction them, it should take every possible security for their
being contracted with foresight and deliberation; and in compensation
for not permitting the parties themselves to revoke their engagement,
should grant them a release from it, on a sufficient case being made out
before an impartial authority. bThese considerations are eminently
applicable to marriage, the most important of all cases of engagement
for life.b

§ 11. [Cases of delegated management] The third exception which I shall
notice, to the doctrine that government cannot manage the affairs of
individuals as well as the individuals themselves, has reference to the
great class of cases in which the individuals can only manage the
concern by delegated agency, and in which the so-called private
management is, in point of fact, hardly better entitled to be called
management by the persons interested, than administration by a public
officer. Whatever, if left to spontaneous agency, can only be done by
joint-stock associations, will often be as well, and sometimes better
done, as far as the actual work is concerned, by the state. Government
management is, indeed, proverbially jobbing, careless, and ineffective,
but so likewise has generally been joint-stock management. The directors
of a joint-stock company, it is true, are always shareholders; but also
the members of a government are invariably taxpayers; and in the case of
directors, no more than in that of governments, is their proportional
share of the benefits of good management, equal to the interest they may
possibly have in mismanagement, even without reckoning the interest of
their ease. It may be objected, that the shareholders, in their
collective character, exercise a certain control over the directors, and
have almost always full power to remove them from office. Practically,
however, the difficulty of exercising this power is found to be so
great, that it is hardly ever exercised except in cases of such
flagrantly unskilful, or, at least, unsuccessful management, as would
generally produce the ejection from office of managers appointed by the
government. Against the avery ineffectuala security afforded by meetings
of shareholders, and by their individual inspection and inquiries, may
be placed the greater publicity and more active discussion and comment,
to be expected in free countries with regard to affairs in which the
general government takes part. Edition: current; Page: [955] The
defects, therefore, of government management, do not seem to be
necessarily much greater, if necessarily greater at all, than those of
management by joint-stock.

The true reasons in favour of leaving to voluntary associations all such
things as they are competent to perform, would exist in equal strength
if it were certain that the work itself would be as well or better done
by public officers. These reasons have been already pointed out: the
mischief of overloading the chief functionaries of government with
demands on their attention, and diverting them from duties which they
alone can discharge, to objects which can be sufficiently well attained
without them; the danger of unnecessarily swelling the direct power and
indirect influence of government, and multiplying occasions of collision
between its agents and private citizens; and the binexpediency of
concentrating in a dominant bureaucracy, all the skill and experience in
the management of large interests, and all the power of organized
action, existing in the community; a practice which keeps the citizens
in a relation to the government like that of children to their
guardians, and is a main cause of the inferior capacity for political
life which has hitherto characterized the over-governed countries of the
Continent, whether with or without the forms of representative
government.*

But although, for these reasons, most things which are likely to be even
tolerably done by voluntary associations, should, generally speaking, be
left to them; it does not follow that the manner in which those
associations perform their work should be entirely uncontrolled by the
government. There are many cases in which the agency, of whatever
nature, by which a service is performed, is certain, from the nature of
the case, to be virtually single; in which a practical monopoly, with
all the power it confers of taxing the community, cannot be prevented
from existing. I have already more than once adverted to the case of the
gas and water companies, among which, though perfect freedom is allowed
to competition, none really takes place, and practically they are found
to be even more irresponsible, and Edition: current; Page: [956]
unapproachable by individual complaints, than the government. There are
the expenses without the advantages of plurality of agency; and the
charge made for services which cannot be dispensed with, is, in
substance, quite as much compulsory taxation as if imposed by law; there
are few householders who make any distinction between their “water rate”
and their other local taxes. In the case of these particular services,
the reasons preponderate in favour of their being performed, like the
paving and cleansing of the streets, not certainly by the general
government of the state, but by the municipal authorities of the town,
and the expense defrayed, as even now it in fact is, by a local rate.
But in the many analogous cases which it is best to resign to voluntary
agency, the community needs some other security for the fit performance
of the service than the interest of the managers; and it is the part of
government, either to subject the business to reasonable conditions for
the general advantage, or to retain such power over it, that the profits
of the monopoly may at least be obtained for the public. This applies to
the case of a road, a canal, or a railway. These are always, in a great
degree, practical monopolies; and a government which concedes such
monopoly unreservedly to a private company, does much the same thing as
if it allowed an individual or an association to levy any tax they
chose, for their own benefit, on all the malt produced in the country,
or on all the cotton imported into it. To make the concession for a
limited time is generally justifiable, on the principle which justifies
patents for inventions: but the state should either reserve to itself a
reversionary property in such public works, or should retain, and freely
exercise, the right of fixing a maximum of fares and charges, and, from
time to time, varying that maximum. It is perhaps necessary to remark,
that the state may be the proprietor of canals or railways without
itself working them; and that they will almost always be better worked
by means of a company, renting the railway or canal for a limited period
from the state.

§ 12. [Cases in which public intervention may be necessary to give
effect to the wishes of the persons interested. Examples: hours of
labour; disposal of colonial lands] To a fourth case of exception I must
request particular attention, it being one to which, as it appears to
me, the attention of political economists has not yet been sufficiently
drawn. There are matters in which the interference of law is required,
not to overrule the judgment of individuals respecting their own
interest, but to give effect to that judgment: they being unable to give
effect to it except by concert, which concert again cannot be effectual
unless it receives validity and sanction from the law. For illustration,
and without prejudging the particular point, I may advert to the
question of diminishing the hours of labour. Let us suppose, what is at
least supposable, whether it be the fact or not—that a general reduction
Edition: current; Page: [957] of the hours of factory laboura, say from
ten to ninea, would be for the advantage of the work-people: that they
would receive as high wages, or nearly as high, for bnineb hours’ labour
as they receive for ctenc. If this would be the result, and if the
operatives generally are convinced that it would, the limitation, some
may say, will be adopted spontaneouslyd. I answer, that it will not be
adopted unless the body of operatives bind themselves to one another to
abide by it. A workman who refused to work more than eninee hours while
there were others who worked ftenf, would either not be employed at all,
or if employed, must submit to lose gonetenthg of his wages. However
convinced, therefore, he may be that it is the interest of the class to
work short time, it is contrary to his own interest to set the example,
unless he is well assured that all or most others will follow it. But
suppose a general agreement of the whole class: might not this be
effectual without the sanction of law? Not unless enforced by opinion
with a rigour practically equal to that of law. For however beneficial
the observance of the regulation might be to the class collectively, the
immediate interest of every individual would lie in violating it: and
the more numerous those were who adhered to the rule, the more would
individuals gain by departing from it. If nearly all restricted
themselves to hnineh hours, those who chose to work for iteni would gain
all the jadvantagesj of the restriction, together with the profit of
infringing it; they would get ktenk hours’ wages for lninel hours’ work,
and man hour’sm wages besides. I grant that if a large majority adhered
to the nninen hours, there would be no harm done: the benefit would be,
in the main, secured to the class, while those individuals who preferred
to work harder and earn more, would have an opportunity of doing so.
This certainly would be the state of things to be wished for; and
assuming that a reduction of hours without any diminution of wages could
take place without expelling the commodity from some of its
markets—which is in every particular instance a question of fact, not of
principle—the manner in which it would be most desirable that this
effect should be brought about, would be by a quiet change in the
general custom of the trade; short hours becoming, by spontaneous
choice, the general practice, but those who chose to deviate from it
having the fullest liberty to do so. Probably, however, so many would
prefer the oteno hours’ work Edition: current; Page: [958] on the
improved terms, that the limitation could not be maintained as a general
practice: what some did from choice, others would soon be obliged to do
from necessity, and those who had chosen long hours for the sake of
increased wages, would be forced in the end to work long hours for no
greater wages than before. Assuming then that it really would be the
interest of each to work only pninep hours if he could be assured that
all others would do the same, there might be no means of their attaining
this object but by converting their supposed mutual agreement into an
engagement under penalty, by consenting to have it enforced by law. I
qam not expressing anyq opinion in favour of such an enactment, rwhich
has never sin this countrys been demanded, and which I certainly should
not, in present circumstances, recommend:r but it serves to exemplify
the manner in which classes of persons may need the assistance of law,
to give effect to their deliberate collective opinion of their own
interest, by affording to every individual a guarantee that his
competitors will pursue the same course, without which he cannot safely
adopt it himself.

Another exemplification of the same principle tis afforded by what is
known as the Wakefield system of colonization. This system is grounded
on the important principle, that the degree of productiveness of land
and labour depends on their being in a due proportion to one another;
that if a few persons in a newly-settled country attempt to occupy and
appropriate a large district, or if each labourer becomes too soon an
occupier and cultivator of land, there is a loss of productive power,
and a great retardation of the progress of the colony in wealth and
civilization: that nevertheless the instinct (uas it may almostu be
called) of appropriation, and the feelings associated in old countries
with landed proprietorship, induce almost every emigrant to take
possession of as much land as he has the means of acquiring, and every
labourer to become at once a proprietor, cultivating his own land with
no other aid than that of his family. If this propensity to the
immediate possession of land could be in some degree restrained, and
each labourer induced to work a certain number of years on hire before
he became a landed proprietor, a perpetual stock of hired labourers
could be maintained, available for roads, canals, works of irrigation,
&c., and for the establishment and carrying on of the different branches
of town industry; whereby the labourer, when he did at last become a
landed proprietor, would find his land much more valuable, through
access to markets, and facility of obtaining hired labour. Mr. Edition:
current; Page: [959] Wakefield therefore proposed to check the premature
occupation of land, and dispersion of the people, by putting upon all
unappropriated lands a rather high price, the proceeds of which were to
be expended in conveying emigrant labourers from the mother country.

This salutary provision, however, has been objected to, in the name and
on the authority of what was represented as the great principle of
political economy, that individuals are the best judges of their own
interest. It was said, that when things are left to themselves, land is
appropriated and occupied by the spontaneous choice of individuals, in
the quantities and at the times most advantageous to each person, and
therefore to the community generally; and that to interpose artificial
obstacles to their obtaining land, is to prevent them from adopting the
course which in their own judgment is most beneficial to them, from a
self-conceited notion of the legislator, that he knows what is most for
their interest, better than they do themselves. Now this is a complete
misunderstanding, either of the system itself, or of the principle with
which it is alleged to conflict. The oversight is similar to that which
we have just seen exemplified on the subject of hours of labour. However
beneficial it might be to the colony in the aggregate, and to each
individual composing it, that no one should occupy more land than he can
properly cultivate, nor become a proprietor until there are other
labourers ready to take his place in working for hire; it can never be
the interest of an individual to exercise this forbearance, unless he is
assured that others will do so too. Surrounded by settlers who have each
their thousand acres, how is he benefited by restricting himself to
fifty? or what does va labourerv gain by deferring the acquisition
altogether for a few years, if all other labourers rush to convert their
first earnings into estates in the wilderness, several miles apart from
one another? If they, by seizing on land, prevent the formation of a
class of labourers for wages, he will not, by postponing the time of his
becoming a proprietor, be enabled to employ the land with any greater
advantage when he does obtain it; to what end therefore should he place
himself in what will appear to him and others a position of inferiority,
by remaining a whiredw labourer, when all around him are proprietors? It
is the interest of each to do what is good for all, but only if others
will do likewise.

The principle that each is the best judge of his own interest,
understood as these objectors understand it, would prove that
governments ought not to fulfil any of their acknowledged duties—ought
not, in fact, to exist at all. It is greatly the interest of the
community, collectively and individually, not to rob or defraud one
another: but there is not the less necessity for laws to punish robbery
and fraud; because, though it is the interest of each that nobody should
rob or cheat, it xis notx any one’s interest to refrain Edition:
current; Page: [960] from robbing and cheating others when all others
are permitted to rob and cheat him. Penal laws exist at all, chiefly for
this yreason—y because zeven anz unanimous opinion that a certain line
of conduct is for the general interest, does not aalwaysa make it
people’s individual interest to adhere to that line of conduct.

§ 13. [Case of acts done for the benefit of others than the persons
concerned. Poor Laws] Fifthly; the argument against governmental
interference grounded on the maxim that individuals are the best judges
of their own interest, cannot apply to the very large class of cases, in
which those acts of individuals awith which the government claims to
interferea, are not done by those individuals for their own interest,
but for the interest of other people. This includes, among other things,
the important and much agitated subject of public charity. Though
individuals should, in general, be left to do for themselves whatever it
can reasonably be expected that they should be capable of doing, yet
when they are at any rate not to be left to themselves, but to be helped
by other people, the question arises whether it is better that they
should receive this help exclusively from individuals, and therefore
uncertainly and casually, or by systematic arrangements, in which
society acts through its organ, the state.

This brings us to the subject of Poor Laws; a subject which would be of
very minor importance if the habits of all classes of the people were
temperate and prudent, and the diffusion of property satisfactory; but
of the greatest moment in a state of things so much the reverse of this,
in both points, as that which the British islands present.

Apart from any metaphysical considerations respecting the foundation of
morals or of the social union, it will be admitted to be right that
human beings should help one another; and the more so, in proportion to
the urgency of the need: and none needs help so urgently as one who is
starving. The claim to help, therefore, created by destitution, is one
of the strongest which can exist; and there is primâ facie the amplest
reason for making the relief of so extreme an exigency as certain to
those who require it, as by any arrangements of society it can be made.

On the other hand, in all cases of helping, there are two sets of
consequences to be considered; the consequences of the assistance
itself, and the consequences of relying on the assistance. The former
are generally beneficial, but the latter, for the most part, injurious;
so much so, in many cases, as greatly to outweigh the value of the
benefit. And this is never more likely to happen than in the very cases
where the need of help is the most intense. Edition: current; Page:
[961] There are few things for which it is more mischievous that people
should rely on the habitual aid of others, than for the means of
subsistence, and unhappily there is no lesson which they more easily
learn. The problem to be solved is therefore one of peculiar nicety as
well as importance; how to give the greatest amount of needful help,
with the smallest encouragement to undue reliance on it.

Energy and self-dependence are, however, liable to be impaired by the
absence of help, as well as by its excess. It is even more fatal to
exertion to have no hope of succeeding by it, than to be assured of
succeeding without it. When the condition of any one is so disastrous
that his energies are paralyzed by discouragement, assistance is a
tonic, not a sedative: it braces instead of bdeadeningb the active
faculties: always provided that the assistance is not such as to
dispense with self-help, by substituting itself for the person’s own
labour, skill, and prudence, but is limited to affording him a better
hope of attaining success by those legitimate means. This accordingly is
a test to which all plans of philanthropy and benevolence should be
brought, whether intended for the benefit of individuals or of classes,
and whether conducted on the voluntary or on the government principle.

In so far as the subject admits of any general doctrine or maxim, it
would appear to be this—that if assistance is given in such a manner
that the condition of the person helped is as desirable as that of the
person who succeeds in doing the same thing without help, the
assistance, if ccapable of being previously calculated on, is
mischievous: but if, while available to everybody, it leaves to every
one a strong motive to do without it if he can, it is then for the most
part beneficial. This principle, applied to a system of public charity,
is that of the Poor Law of 1834. If the condition of a person receiving
relief is made as eligible as that of the labourer who supports himself
by his own exertions, the system strikes at the root of all individual
industry and self-government; and, if fully acted up to, would require
as its supplement an organized system of compulsion, for governing and
setting to work like cattle, those who had been removed from the
influence of the motives that act on human beings. But if, consistently
with guaranteeing all persons against absolute want, the condition of
those who are supported by legal charity can be kept considerably less
desirable than the condition of those who find support for themselves,
none but beneficial consequences can arise from a law which renders it
impossible for any person, except by his own choice, to die from
insufficiency of food. That in England at least this supposition can be
realized, is proved by the experience of a long period preceding the
close of the last century, as well as by that of many highly pauperized
districts in more recent times, which have been dispauperized by
adopting strict rules of poor-law administration, Edition: current;
Page: [962] to the great and permanent benefit of the whole labouring
class. There is probably no country in which, by varying the means
suitably to the character of the people, a legal provision for the
destitute might not be made compatible with the observance of the
conditions necessary to its being innocuous.

Subject to these conditions, I conceive it to be highly desirable, that
the certainty of subsistence should be held out by law to the destitute
able-bodied, rather than that their relief should depend on voluntary
charity. In the first place, charity almost always does too much or too
little: it lavishes its bounty in one place, and leaves people to starve
in another. Secondly, since the state must necessarily provide
subsistence for the criminal poor while undergoing punishment, not to do
the same for the poor who have not offended is to give a premium on
crime. And lastly, if the poor are left to individual charity, a vast
amount of mendicity is inevitabled. What the state may and should
abandon to private charity, is the task of distinguishing between one
case of real necessity and another. ePrivate charity can give more to
the more deserving.e The state must act by general rules. It cannot
undertake to discriminate between the deserving and the undeserving
indigent. It owes no more than subsistence to the first, and fcan give
no less to the last. What is said about the injustice of a law which has
no better treatment for the merely unfortunate poor than for the
ill-conducted, is founded on a misconception of the province of law and
public authority. The dispensers of public relief have no business to be
inquisitors. Guardians and overseers are not fit to be trusted to give
or withhold other people’s money according to their verdict on the
morality of the person soliciting it; and it would show much ignorance
of the ways of mankind to suppose that such persons, even in the almost
impossible case of their being qualified, will take the trouble of
ascertaining and sifting the past conduct of a person in distress, so as
to form a rational judgment on it. Private charity can make these
distinctions; and in bestowing its own money, is entitled to do so
according to its own judgment. It should understand that this is its
peculiar and appropriate province, and that it is commendable or the
contrary, as it exercises the function with more or gless discernment.
But the administrators of a public fund ought not to be required to do
more for anybody, than that minimum which is due even to the worst. If
they are, the indulgence very speedily becomes the rule, and refusal the
more or less capricious or tyrannical exception.

§ 14. [Case of acts done for the benefit of others. Colonization]
Another class of cases which fall within the same general principle as
the case of Edition: current; Page: [963] public charity, are those in
which the acts done by individuals, though intended solely for their own
benefit, involve consequences extending indefinitely beyond them, to
interests of the nation or of posterity, for which society in its
collective capacity is alone able, and alone bound, to provide. One of
these cases is that of Colonization. If it is desirable, as no one will
deny it to be, that the planting of colonies should be conducted, not
with an exclusive view to the private interests of the first founders,
but with a deliberate regard to the permanent welfare of the nations
afterwards to arise from these small beginnings; such regard can only be
secured by placing the enterprise, from its commencement, under
regulations constructed with the foresight and enlarged views of
philosophical legislators; and the government alone has power either to
frame such regulations, or to enforce their observance.

The question of government intervention in the work of Colonization
involves the future and permanent interests of civilization itself, and
far outstretches the comparatively narrow limits of purely economical
considerations. But even with a view to those considerations alone, the
removal of population from the overcrowded to the unoccupied parts of
the earth’s surface is one of those works of eminent social usefulness,
which most require, and which at the same time best repay, the
intervention of government.

To appreciate the benefits of colonization, it should be considered in
its relation, not to a single country, but to the collective economical
interests of the human race. The question is in general treated too
exclusively as one of distribution; of relieving one labour market and
supplying another. It is this, but it is also a question of production,
and of the most efficient employment of the productive resources of the
world. Much has been said of the good economy of importing commodities
from the place where they can be bought cheapest; while the good economy
of producing them where they can be produced cheapest, is comparatively
little thought of. If to carry consumable goods from the places where
they are superabundant to those where they are scarce, is a good
pecuniary speculation, is it not an equally good speculation to do the
same thing with regard to labour and instruments? The exportation of
labourers and capital from old to new countries, from a place where
their productive power is less, to a place where it is greater,
increases by so much the aggregate produce of the labour and capital of
the world. It adds to the joint wealth of the old and the new country,
what amounts in a short period to many times the mere cost of effecting
the transport. There needs be no hesitation in affirming that
Colonization, in the present state of the world, is the abest affair of
business, in which the capital of an old and wealthy country can
bengage.

Edition: current; Page: [964]
It is equally obvious, however, that Colonization on a great scale can
be undertaken, as an affair of business, only by the government, or by
some combination of individuals in complete understanding with the
governmentc; except under such very peculiar circumstances as those
which succeeded the Irish faminec. Emigration on the voluntary principle
drarely hasd any material influence in lightening the pressure of
population in the old country, though as far as it goes it is doubtless
a benefit to the colony. Those labouring persons who voluntarily
emigrate are seldom the very poor; they are small farmers with some
little capital, or labourers who have saved something, and who, in
removing only their own labour from the crowded labour-market, withdraw
from the capital of the country a fund which maintained and employed
more labourers than themselves. Besides, this portion of the community
is so limited in number, that it might be removed entirely, without
making any sensible impression upon the numbers of the population, or
even upon the annual increase. Any considerable emigration of labour is
only practicable, when its cost is defrayed, or at least advanced, by
others than the eemigrantse themselves. Who then is to advance it?
Naturally, it may be said, the capitalists of the colony, who require
the labour, and who intend to employ it. But to this there is the
obstacle, that a capitalist, after going to the expense of carrying out
labourers, has no security that he shall be the person to derive any
benefit from them. If all the capitalists of the colony were to combine,
and bear the expense by subscription, they would still have no security
that the labourers, when there, would continue to work for them. After
working for a short time and earning a few pounds, they always, unless
prevented by the government, squat on unoccupied land, and work only for
themselves. The experiment has been repeatedly tried whether it was
possible to enforce contracts for labour, or the repayment of the
passage money of emigrants to those who advanced it, and the trouble and
expense have always exceeded the advantage. The only other resource is
the voluntary contributions of parishes or individuals, to rid
themselves of surplus labourers who are already, or who are likely to
become, locally chargeable on the poor-rate. Were this speculation to
become general, it might produce a sufficient amount of emigration to
clear off the existing unemployed population, but not to raise the wages
of the femployedf: and the same thing would require to be done over
again in less than another generation.

One of the principal reasons why Colonization should be a national
undertaking, is that in this manner aloneg, save in highly exceptional
cases,g can emigration be self-supporting. The exportation of capital
and labour Edition: current; Page: [965] to a new country being, as
before observed, one of the best of all affairs of business, it is
absurd that it should not, like other affairs of business, repay its own
expenses. Of the great addition which it makes to the produce of the
world, there can be no reason why a sufficient portion should not be
intercepted, and employed in reimbursing the outlay incurred in
effecting it. For reasons already given, no individual, or body of
individuals, can reimburse themselves for the expense; the government,
however, can. It can take from the annual increase of wealth, caused by
the emigration, the fraction which suffices to repay with interest what
the emigration has cost. The expenses of emigration to a colony ought to
be borne by the colony; and this, in general, is only possible when they
are borne by the colonial government.

Of the modes in which a fund for the support of colonization can be
raised in the colony, none is comparable in advantage to that which was
first suggested, and hso ably and perseveringly advocated, by Mr.
Wakefield: the plan of putting a price on all unoccupied land, and
devoting the proceeds to emigration. The unfounded and pedantic
objections to this plan have been answered in a former part of this
chapter: we have now to speak of its advantages. First, it avoids the
difficulties and discontents incident to raising a large annual amount
by taxation; a thing which it is almost useless to attempt with a
scattered population of settlers in the wilderness, who, as experience
proves, can seldom be compelled to pay direct taxes, except at a cost
exceeding their amount; while in an infant community indirect taxation
soon reaches its limit. The sale of lands is thus by far the easiest
mode of raising the requisite funds. But it has other and still greater
recommendations. It is a beneficial check upon the tendency of a
population of colonists to adopt the tastes and inclinations of savage
life, and to disperse so widely as to lose all the advantages of
commerce, of markets, of separation of employments, and combination of
labour. By making it necessary for those who emigrate at the expense of
the fund, to earn a considerable sum before they can become landed
proprietors, it keeps up a perpetual succession of labourers for hire,
who in every country are a most important auxiliary even to peasant
proprietors: and by diminishing the eagerness of agricultural
speculators to add to their domain, it keeps the settlers within reach
of each other for purposes of co-operation, arranges a numerous body of
them within easy distance of each centre of foreign commerce and
non-agricultural industry, and insures the formation and rapid growth of
towns and town products. This concentration, compared with the
dispersion which uniformly occurs when unoccupied land can be had for
nothing, greatly accelerates the attainment of prosperity, and enlarges
the fund which may be drawn upon for further emigration. Before the
adoption of the Wakefield system, the early years of all new colonies
Edition: current; Page: [966] were full of hardship and difficulty: the
last colony founded on the old principle, the Swan River settlement,
being one of the most characteristic instances. In all subsequent
colonization, the Wakefield principle has been acted upon, though
imperfectly, ia part only of the proceeds jof the sale of landj being
devoted to emigration: yet wherever it has been introduced at all, as in
South Australia, kVictoriak, and New Zealand, the restraint put upon the
dispersion of the settlers, and the influx of capital caused by the
assurance of being able to obtain hired labour, has, in spite of many
difficulties and much mismanagement, produced a suddenness and rapidity
of prosperity more like fable than reality.l*

The self-supporting system of colonization, once established, would
increase in efficiency every year; its effect would tend to increase in
geometrical progression: for since every able-bodied emigrant, until the
country is fully peopled, adds in a very short time to its wealth, over
and above his own consumption, as much as would defray the expense of
bringing out another emigrant, it follows that the greater the number
already sent, the greater number might continue to be sent, each
emigrant laying the foundation of a succession of other emigrants at
short intervals without fresh expense, until the colony is filled up. It
would therefore be worth while, to the mother country, to accelerate the
early stages of this progression, by loans to the colonies for the
purpose of emigration, repayable from the fund formed by the sales of
land. In thus advancing the means of accomplishing a large immediate
emigration, it would be investing that amount of capital in the mode, of
all others, most beneficial to the colony; and the labour and savings of
these emigrants would hasten the period at which a large sum would be
available from sales of land. It would be necessary, in order not to
overstock the labour market, to act in concert with the persons disposed
to remove their own capital to the colony. The knowledge Edition:
current; Page: [967] that a large amount of hired labour would be
available, in so productive a field of employment, would insure a large
emigration of capital from a country, like England, of low profits and
rapid accumulation: and it would only be necessary not to send out a
greater number of labourers at one time, than this capital could absorb
and employ at high wages.

Inasmuch as, on this system, any given amount of expenditure, once
incurred, would provide not merely a single emigration, but a
perpetually flowing stream of emigrants, which would increase in breadth
and depth as it flowed on; this mode of relieving overpopulation has a
recommendation, not possessed by any other plan ever proposed for making
head against the consequences of increase without restraining the
increase itself: there is an element of indefiniteness in it; no one can
perfectly foresee how far its influence, as a vent for surplus
population, might possibly reach. There is hence the strongest
obligation on the government of a country like our own, with a crowded
population, and unoccupied continents under its command, to build, as it
were, and keep open, min concert with the colonial governments,m a
bridge from the mother country to those continents, by establishing the
self-supporting system of colonization on such a scale, that as great an
amount of emigration as the colonies can at the time accommodate, may at
all times be able to take place without cost to the emigrants
themselves.

nThe importance of these considerations, oas regards the British
islands, phas been of latep considerably diminished by the unparalleled
amount of spontaneous emigration from Ireland; an emigration not solely
of small farmers, but of the poorest class of agricultural labourers,
and which is at once voluntary and self-supporting, the succession of
emigrants being kept up by funds contributed from the earnings of their
relatives and connexions who qhadq gone before. rTo this has been added
a large amount of voluntary emigration to the seats of the gold
discoveries, which has partly supplied the wants of our most distant
colonies, where, both for local and national interests, it was most of
all required. But the stream of both these emigrations has already
considerably slackened, and sthough that from Ireland has since
partially revived,s tit is not certaint that the aid of government in a
systematic form, and on the self-supporting principle, uwill not again
becomeu necessary to keep the communication open between the hands
needing work in England, and the work which needs hands elsewhere.rn

Edition: current; Page: [968]
§ 15. [Case of acts done for the benefit of others. Miscellaneous
examples] The same principle which points out colonization, and the
relief of the indigent, as cases to which the principal objection to
government interference does not apply, extends also to a variety of
cases, in which important public services are to be performed, while yet
there is no individual specially interested in performing them, nor
would any adequate remuneration naturally or spontaneously attend their
performance. Take for instance a voyage of geographical or scientific
exploration. The information sought may be of great public value, yet no
individual would derive any benefit from it which would repay the
expense of fitting out the expedition; and there is no mode of
intercepting the benefit on its way to those who profit by it, in order
to levy a toll for the remuneration of its authors. Such voyages are, or
might be, undertaken by private subscription; but this is a rare and
precarious resource. Instances are more frequent in which the expense
has been borne by public companies or philanthropic associations; but in
general such enterprises have been conducted at the expense of
government, which is thus enabled to entrust them to the persons in its
judgment best qualified for the task. Again, it is a proper office of
government to build and maintain lighthouses, establish buoys, &c. for
the security of navigation: for since it is impossible that the ships at
sea which are benefited by a lighthouse, should be made to pay a toll on
the occasion of its use, no one would build lighthouses from motives of
personal interest, unless indemnified and rewarded from a compulsory
levy made by the state. There are many scientific researches, of great
value to a nation and to mankind, requiring assiduous devotion of time
and labour, and not unfrequently great expense, by persons who can
obtain a high price for their services in other ways. If the government
had no power to grant indemnity for expense, and remuneration for time
and labour thus employed, such researches could only be undertaken by
the very few persons who, with an independent fortune, unite technical
knowledge, laborious habits, and either great public spirit, or an
ardent desire of scientific celebrity.

aConnected with this subject is the question of providing, by means of
endowments or salaries, for the maintenance of what has been called a
learned class. The cultivation of speculative knowledge, though one of
the most useful of all employments, is a service rendered to bab
community collectively, not individually, and one cconsequently for
whichc it is, primâ facie, reasonable that the community collectively
should pay; since it gives no claim on any individual for a pecuniary
remuneration; and unless a provision is made for such services from some
public fund, there is not only Edition: current; Page: [969] no
encouragement to them, but there is as much discouragement as is implied
in the impossibility of gaining a living by such pursuits, and the
necessity consequently imposed on most of those who would be capable of
them, to employ the greatest part of their time in gaining a
subsistence. The evil, however, is greater in appearance than in
reality. The greatest things, it has been said, have generally been done
by those who had the least time at their disposal; and the occupation of
some hours every day in a routine employment, has often been found
compatible with the most brilliant achievements in literature and
philosophy. Yet there are investigations and experiments which require
not only a long but a continuous devotion of time and attention: there
are also occupations which so engross and fatigue the mental faculties,
as to be inconsistent with any vigorous employment of them upon other
subjects, even in intervals of leisure. It is highly desirable,
therefore, that there should be a mode of insuring to the public the
services of scientific discoverers, and perhaps of some other classes of
savants, by affording them the means of support consistently with
devoting a sufficient portion of time to their peculiar pursuits. The
fellowships of dthed Universities are an institution excellently adapted
for such a purpose; but are hardly ever applied to it, being bestowed,
at the best, as a reward for past proficiency, in committing to memory
what has been done by others, and not as the salary of future labours in
the advancement of knowledge. In some countries, Academies of science,
antiquities, history, &c., have been formed, with emoluments annexed.
The most effectual plan, and at the same time eleast liable to abuse,
seems to be that of conferring Professorships, with duties of
instruction attached to them. The occupation of teaching a branch of
knowledge, at least in its higher departments, is a help rather than an
impediment to the systematic cultivation of the subject itself. The
duties of a professorship almost always leave much time for original
researches; and the greatest advances which have been made in the
various sciences, both moral and physical, have originated with those
who were public teachers of them; from fPlato and Aristotlef to the
great names of the Scotch, French, and German Universities. I do not
mention the English, because guntil very latelyg their professorships
hhave beenh, as is well known, little more than nominal. In the case,
too, of a lecturer in a great institution of education, the public at
large has the means of judging, if not the quality of the teaching, at
least the talents and industry of the teacher; and it is more difficult
to misemploy the power of appointment to such an office, than to job in
pensions and salaries to persons not so directly before the public eye.a

Edition: current; Page: [970]
It may be said generally, that anything which it is desirable should be
done for the general interests of mankind or of future generations, or
for the present interests of those members of the community who require
external aid, but which is not of a nature to remunerate individuals or
associations for undertaking it, is in itself a suitable thing to be
undertaken by government: though, before making the work their own,
governments ought always to consider if there be any rational
probability of its being done on what is called the voluntary principle,
and if so, whether it is likely to be done in a better or more effectual
manner by government agency, than by the zeal and liberality of
individuals.

§ 16. [Government intervention may be necessary in default of private
agency, in cases where private agency would be more suitable] The
preceding heads comprise, to the best of my judgment, the whole of the
exceptions to the practical maxim, that the business of society can be
best performed by private and voluntary agency. It is, however,
necessary to add, that the intervention of government cannot always
practically stop short at the limit which defines the cases
intrinsically suitable for it. In the particular circumstances of a
given age or nation, there is scarcely anything really important to the
general interest, which it may not be desirable, or even necessary, that
the government should take upon itself, not because private individuals
cannot effectually perform it, but because they will not. At some times
and places, there will be no roads, docks, harbours, canals, works of
irrigation, hospitals, schools, colleges, printing-presses, unless the
government establishes them; the public being either too poor to command
the necessary resources, or too little advanced in intelligence to
appreciate the ends, or not sufficiently practised in ajointa action to
be capable of the means. This is true, more or less, of all countries
inured to despotism, and particularly of those in which there is a very
wide distance in civilization between the people and the government: as
in those which have been conquered and are retained in subjection by a
more energetic and more cultivated people. In many parts of the world,
the people can do nothing for themselves which requires large means and
combined action: all such things are left undone, unless done by the
state. In these cases, the mode in which the government can most surely
demonstrate the sincerity with which it intends the greatest good of its
subjects, is by doing the things which are made incumbent on it by the
helplessness of the public, in such a manner as shall tend not to
increase and perpetuate, but to correct, that helplessness. A good
government will give all its aid in such a shape, as to encourage and
nurture any rudiments it may find of a spirit of individual exertion. It
will be assiduous in removing obstacles and discouragements to voluntary
enterprise, Edition: current; Page: [971] and in giving whatever
facilities and whatever direction and guidance may be necessary: its
pecuniary means will be bappliedb, when practicable, in aid of private
efforts rather than in supersession of them, and it will call into play
its machinery of rewards and honours to elicit such efforts. Government
aid, when given merely in default of private enterprise, should be so
given as to be as far as possible a course of education for the people
in the art of accomplishing great objects by individual energy and
voluntary co-operation.

I have not thought it necessary here to insist on that part of the
functions of government which all admit to be indispensable, the
function of prohibiting and punishing such conduct on the part of
individuals in the exercise of their freedom, as is clearly injurious to
other persons, whether the case be one of force, fraud, or negligence.
Even in the best state which society has yet reached, it is lamentable
to think how great a proportion of all the efforts and talents in the
world are employed in merely neutralizing one another. It is the proper
end of government to reduce this wretched waste to the smallest possible
amount, by taking such measures as shall cause the energies now spent by
mankind in injuring one another, or in protecting themselves against
injury, to be turned to the legitimate employment of the human
faculties, that of compelling the powers of nature to be more and more
subservient to physical and moral good.

Edition: current; Page: [972] Edition: current; Page: [973]


APPENDICES

Edition: current; Page: [974] Edition: current; Page: [975]


Appendix A

Book II, Chapter i (“Of Property”), §§ 3-6, 2nd edition (1849), collated
with the 1st edition and the MS1

§ 3. [Examination of Communism] It would be too much to affirm that
communities constituted on aanya of these principles could not
permanently subsist. That a country of any large extent could be formed
into a single “Co-operative Society,” is indeed not easily conceivable.
The nearest approach to it ever realized seems to have been the
government of Peru under the Incas, a despotism held together by a
superstition; not likely to be erected into a type for modern
aspirations, although it appeared mild and beneficent to those who
contrasted it with the iron rule which took its place.* But a country
might be covered with small Socialist communities, and these might have
a Congress to manage their joint concerns. The scheme is not what is
commonly meant by impracticable. Supposing that the soil and climate
were tolerably propitious, and that the several communities, possessing
the means of all necessary production within themselves, had not to
contend in the general markets of the world against the competition of
societies founded on private property, I doubt not that by a very rigid
system of repressing population, they might be able to live and hold
together, without positive discomfort. This would be a considerable
improvement, so far as the great majority are concerned, over those
existing states of society in which no restraint at all is placed on
population, or in which the restraint is very inadequate.

[The objection ordinarily made to a system of community of property and
equal distribution of the produce, that each person would be incessantly
Edition: current; Page: [976] occupied in evading his fair share of the
work,]2 is, I think, in general considerably overstated. There is a kind
of work, hitherto more indispensable than most others, that of fighting,
which is never conducted on any other than the co-operative system; and
neither in a rude nor in a civilized society has the supposed difficulty
been experienced. Education and the current of opinion having adapted
themselves to the exigency, the sense of honour and the fear of shame
have as yet been found to operate with sufficient strength; and common
sentiment has sanctioned the enforcement by adequate penalties, upon
those not sufficiently influenced by other motives, of rules of
discipline certainly not deficient in rigidity. The same sanctions would
not fail to attach themselves to the operations of industry, and to
secure, as indeed they are found to do in the Moravian and similar
establishments, a tolerable adherence to the prescribed standard of
duty. The deficiency would be of motives to exceed that minimum
standard. In war, the question lies between great success and great
failure, between losing a battle and gaining it, perhaps between being
slaves and conquerors; and the circumstances of the case are stirring
and stimulating to the feelings and faculties. The common operations of
industry are the reverse of stirring and stimulating, and the only
direct result of extra exertion would be a trifling addition to the
common stock shared out among the mass. Mankind are capable of a far
greater amount of public spirit than the present age is accustomed to
suppose possible. But if the question were that of taking a great deal
of personal trouble to produce a very small and unconspicuous public
benefit, the love of ease would preponderate. Those who made extra
exertions would expect and demand that the same thing should be required
from others and made a duty; and in the long run, little more work would
be performed by any, than could be exacted from all: the limit to all
irksome labour would be the amount which the majority would consent to
have made compulsory on themselves. But the majority, even in our
present societies, where the intensity of competition and the exclusive
dependence of each on his own energies tend to give a morbid strength to
the industrial spirit, are almost everywhere indolent and unambitious;
content with little, and unwilling to trouble themselves in order to
make it more. The standard of industrial duty would therefore be fixed
extremely low. There are, no doubt, some kinds of useful exertion to
which the stimulus would not be weakened in the same degree. Invention
is one of these. Invention is in itself an agreeable exercise of the
faculties; and when applied successfully to the diminution of labour or
the satisfaction of the physical wants of the community, it would in any
society be a source of considerable éclat. But though to invent is a
pleasant operation, to perfect an invention and render it practical is a
dull and toilsome one; requiring also means and appliances Edition:
current; Page: [977] which, in a society so bconstructed,b no one would
possess of his own. The many and long-continued trials by which the
object is at last attained, could only be made by first persuading the
majority that the scheme would be advantageous: and might be broken off
at the very time when the work approached completion, if the patience of
the majority became exhausted. We might expect therefore that there
would be many projects conceived, and very few perfected; while, the
projects being prosecuted, if at all, at the public expense and not at
the projector’s, if there was any disposition to encourage them, the
proportion of bad schemes to good would probably be even greater than at
present.

It must be further observed, that the perfect equality contemplated in
the theory of the scheme could not be really attained. The produce might
be divided equally, but how could the labour? There are many kinds of
work, and by what standard are they to be measured one against another?
Who is to judge how much cotton spinning, or distributing goods from the
stores, or bricklaying, or chimney sweeping, is equivalent to so much
ploughing? In the existing system of industry these things do adjust
themselves with some, though but a distant, approach to fairness. If one
kind of work is harder or more disagreeable than another, or requires a
longer practice, it is better paid, simply because there are fewer
competitors for it; and an individual generally finds that he can earn
most by doing the thing which he is fittest for. I admit that this
self-adjusting machinery does not touch some of the grossest of the
existing inequalities of remuneration, and in particular the unjust
advantage possessed by almost the commonest mental over almost the
hardest and most disagreeable bodily labour. Employments which require
any kind of technical education, however simple, have hitherto been the
subject of a real monopoly as against the mass. But as popular
instruction advances, this monopoly is already becoming less complete,
and every increase of prudence and foresight among the people encroaches
upon it more and more. On the Communist system the impossibility of
making the adjustment between different qualities of labour is so
strongly felt, that the advocates of the scheme usually find it
necessary to provide that all should work by turns at every description
of useful labour; an arrangement which, by putting an end to the
division of employments, would sacrifice the principal advantage which
co-operative production possesses, and would probably reduce the amount
of production still lower than in our supposition. And after all, the
nominal equality of labour would be so great a real inequality, that
justice would revolt against its being enforced. All persons are not
equally fit for all labour; and the same quantity of labour is an
unequal burthen on the weak and the strong, the hardy and the delicate,
the quick and cslow, the dull and the intelligent.

Edition: current; Page: [978]
Assuming, however, all the success which is claimed for this state of
society by its partisans, it remains to be considered how much would be
really gained for mankind, and whether the form that would be given to
life, and the character which would be impressed on human nature, dwould
be such as tod satisfy any but a elow estimate of the capabilities of
the species. fOn the Communistic scheme, supposing it to be successful,
there would be an end to all anxiety concerning the means of
subsistence; and this would be much gained for human happiness. But it
is perfectly possible to realize this same advantage in a society
grounded on private property; and to this point the tendencies of
political speculation are rapidly converging. Supposing this attained,
it is surely a vast advantage on the side of the individual system, that
it is compatible with a far greater degree of personal liberty.f The
perfection of social arrangements would be to secure to all persons
complete independence and freedom of action, subject to no restriction
but that of not doing injury to othersg. Theg scheme which we are
considering h(at least as it is commonly understood)h abrogates this
freedom entirely, and places every action of every member of the
community under command.

iCommunism, it is true, might exist without forcing the members of the
community to live together, or controlling them in the disposal of their
appointed rations, and of such leisure as might be left to them; but it
is of the essence of the scheme, that the association, through its
managing body, should have absolute power over every one of its members
during working hours, and that no one could choose either at what, or
with whom, or Edition: current; Page: [979] generally in what method, he
would work. Let us add, that the work would be devoid of all feeling of
interest, except that which might be conferred on it by a principle of
duty to the community. All the interest which it now derives from the
hope of advancement, or of increased gain to the labourer himself, or to
the objects of his private affections, would cease; and it remains to be
shown that any equally powerful source of excitement would be
substituted for these, or that the feeling of duty, even if strong
enough to ensure performance of the work, would have the power of
rendering it agreeable. What was done, would probably be done as men do
the things, which are not done from choice but from necessity: and a
life passed in the enforced observance of an external rule, and
performance of a prescribed task, would sink into a monotonous routine.
Lastly, the identity of education and pursuits would tend to impress on
all the same unvarying type of character; to the destruction of that
multiform development of human nature, those manifold unlikenesses, that
diversity of tastes and talents, and variety of intellectual points of
view, which not only form a great part of the interest of human life,
but by bringing intellects into stimulating collision, and by presenting
to each innumerable notions that he could not have conceived of himself,
are the mainspring of mental and moral progression.i

I am aware it may be said that the great majority of the species already
suffer, in the existing state of society, all the disadvantages which I
ascribe to the Communist system. The factory labourer has as monotonous,
indeed a more monotonous existence, than a member of an Owenite
community; working a greater number of hours, and at the same dull
occupation, without the alternation of employment which the Socialist
scheme provides. The generality of labourers, in this and most other
countries, have as little choice of occupation or freedom of locomotion,
are practically as dependent on fixed rules and on the will of others,
as they could be on any system short of actual slavery; to say nothing
of the entire domestic subjection of one half the species, to whom it is
the signal honour of Owenism and most other forms of jSocialismj that
they assign equal rights, in all respects, with those of the hitherto
dominant sex. Again, it may be said of almost all labourers, on the
present system, namely of all who work by the day, or for a fixed
salary, that labouring for the gain of others, not for their own, they
have no interest in doing more than the smallest quantity of work which
will pass as a fulfilment of the mere terms of their engagement.
Production, therefore, it may be said, should be at least as inefficient
on the present plan, as it would be from a similar cause under the
other.

To take the last argument first, it is true that, for the very reason
assigned, namely the insufficient interest which day-labourers have in
the result of their labour, there is a natural tendency in such labour
to be extremely Edition: current; Page: [980] inefficient: a tendency
only kto bek overcome by lvigilant superintendence on the part of
persons who are interested in the result. The “master’s eye” is
notoriously the only security to be relied on. If a delegated and hired
superintendence is found effectual, it is when the superintendents
themselves are well superintended, and have a high salary and a
privileged situation to lose on being found neglectful of their trust.
Superintend them as you will, day-labourers are so much inferior to
those who work by the piece, that the latter system is practised in all
industrial occupations to which it is conveniently applicable. And yet
it is by no means true that day-labourers, under the present
arrangements, have no inducements of private interest to energetic
action. They have a strong inducement, that of gaining a character as
workmen, which may secure them a preference in employment; and they have
often a hope of promotion and of rising in the world, nor is that hope
always disappointed. Where no such possibility is open to the labouring
classes, their condition is confessedly wrong, and demands a remedy.
With respect to the other objections which I have anticipated, I freely
admit them. I believe that the condition of the operatives in a
well-regulated manufactory, with a great reduction of the hours of
labour and a considerable variety of the kind of it, is very like what
the condition of all would be in man Owenitem community. nBut to
maintain even this state, the limitation of the propagative powers of
the community must be as much a matter of public regulation as
everything else; since under the supposed arrangements prudential
restraint would no longer exist. Now, if we suppose an equal degree of
regulation to take place under the present system, either compulsorily,
or, what would be so much preferable, voluntarily; a condition at least
equal to what the oCommunisto system offers to all, would fall to the
lot of the least fortunate, by the mere action of the competitive
principle. Whatever of pecuniary means or freedom of action any one
obtained beyond this, would be so much to be counted in favour of the
competitive system. It is an abuse of the principle of equality to
demand that no individual be permitted to be better off than the rest,
when his being so makes none of the others worse off than they otherwise
would be.

§ 4. [Examination of St. Simonism] These arguments aagainst Communism
are not applicable to St. Simonism, a system of far higher intellectual
pretensions than the bformer:b constructed with greater foresight of
Edition: current; Page: [981] objections, and juster appreciation of
them; grounded on views of human nature much less limited, and the work
altogether of larger and more accomplished minds, by most of whom
accordingly, what was erroneous in their theory has long ago been seen
and abandoned. [The St. Simonian scheme does not contemplate an equal,
but an unequal division of the produce; it does not propose that all
should be occupied alike, but differently, according to their vocation
or capacity; the function of each being assigned, like grades in a
regiment, by the choice of the directing authority, and the remuneration
being by salary, proportioned to the importance, in the eyes of that
authority, of the function itself, and the merits of the person who
fulfils it. For the constitution of the ruling body, different plans
might be adopted, consistently with the essentials of the system. It
might be appointed by popular suffrage. In the idea of the original
authors, the rulers were supposed to be persons of genius and virtue,
who obtained the voluntary adhesion of the rest by]1 mere [force of
mental superiority],2 through a religious feeling of reverence and
subordination. Society, thus constituted, would wear as diversified a
face as it does now; would be still fuller of interest and excitement,
would hold out even more abundant stimulus to individual exertion, and
would nourish, it is to be feared, even more of rivalries and
animosities than at present. [That the scheme might in some peculiar
states of society work with advantage,]3 I will not deny. [There is
indeed a successful experiment, of a somewhat similar kind, on record,
to which I have once alluded, that of the Jesuits, in Paraguay. A race
of savages, belonging to a portion of mankind more averse to consecutive
exertion for a distant object than any other authentically known to us,
was brought under the mental dominion of civilized and instructed men
who were united among themselves by a system of community of goods. To
the absolute authority of these men they reverentially submitted
themselves, and were induced by them to learn the arts of civilized
life, and to practise labours for the community which no inducement that
could have been offered would have prevailed on them to practise for
themselves. This social system was of short duration, being prematurely
destroyed by diplomatic arrangements and foreign force. That it could be
brought into action at all was probably owing to the immense distance in
point of knowledge and intellect which separated the few rulers from the
whole body of the ruled, without any intermediate orders, either social
or intellectual. In any other circumstances it would probably have been
a complete failure]4; and we may venture to say that in no European
community could it have even the Edition: current; Page: [982] partial
success which might really be obtained by an association on the
principle of Communism. [It supposes an absolute despotism in the heads
of the association; which would probably not be much improved if the
depositaries of the despotism (contrary to the views of the authors of
the system) were varied from time to time according to the result of a
popular canvass. But to suppose that one or a few human beings,
howsoever selected, could, by whatever machinery of subordinate agency,
be qualified to adapt each person’s work to his capacity, and proportion
each person’s remuneration to his merits—to be, in fact, the dispensers
of distributive justice to every member of a community]5, were it even
the smallest that ever had a separate political existence—[or that any
use which they could make of this power would give general satisfaction,
or would be submitted to without the aid of force—is a supposition
almost too chimerical to be reasoned against. A fixed rule, like that of
equality, might be acquiesced in, and so might chance, or an external
necessity; but that a handful of human beings should weigh everybody in
the balance, and give more to one and less to another at their sole
pleasure and judgment, would not be borne unless from persons believed
to be more than men, and backed by supernatural terrors.

§ 5. [Examination of Fourierism] aThe most skilfully combined, and]1 in
every respect the least open to objection, of [the forms of Socialism,
is that commonly known as Fourierism. This system does not contemplate
the abolition of private property, nor even of inheritance: on the
contrary, it avowedly takes into consideration, as an element in the
distribution of the produce, capital as well as labour. It proposes that
the operations of industry should be carried on by associations of about
two thousand members, combining their labour on a district of about a
square league in extent, under the guidance of chiefs selected by
themselves. In the distribution, a certain minimum is first assigned for
the subsistence of every member of the community, whether capable or not
of labour. The remainder of the produce is shared in certain
proportions, to be determined beforehand, among the three elements,
Labour, Capital, and Talent. The capital of the Edition: current; Page:
[983] community may be owned in unequal shares by different members, who
would in that case receive, as in any other joint-stock company,
proportional dividends. The claim of each person on the share of the
produce apportioned to talent, is estimated by the grade or rank which
the individual occupies in the several groups of labourers to which he
or she belongs; these grades being in all cases conferred by the choice
of his or her companions. The remuneration, when received, would not of
necessity be expended or enjoyed in common; there would be separate
ménages for all who preferred them, and no other community of living is
contemplated, than that all the members of the association should reside
in the same pile of buildings; for saving of labour and expense not only
in building, but in every branch of domestic economy; and in order that,
the whole]2 [buying and selling operations of the community being
performed by a single agent, the enormous portion of the produce of
industry now carried off by the profits of mere distributors might be
reduced to the smallest amount possible.]3

Thus far it is apparent that this [system, unlike Communism, does not,
in theory at least, withdraw any of the motives to exertion which exist
in the present]4 system [of society. On the contrary, if the
arrangement]5 could be supposed to work [according to the intentions of
its contrivers, it would even strengthen those motives, since each
person would have much more certainty of reaping individually the fruits
of increased skill or energy, bodily or mental, than under the present
social arrangements can be felt by any but those who are in the most
advantageous positions, or to whom the chapter of accidents is more than
ordinarily favourable. The Fourierists, however, have still another
resource. They believe that they have solved the great and fundamental
problem of rendering labour attractive. That this is not impracticable,
they contend by very strong arguments; in particular by one which they
have in common with the Owenites, viz., that scarcely any labour,
however severe, undergone by human beings for the sake of subsistence,
exceeds in intensity that which other human beings, whose subsistence is
already provided for, are found ready and even eager to undergo for
pleasure. This certainly is a most significant fact, and one from which
the student in social philosophy may draw important instruction. But the
argument founded on it may easily be stretched too far. If occupations
full of discomfort and fatigue are freely pursued by many persons as
amusements, who does not see that they are amusements exactly because
they are pursued freely, and may be discontinued at pleasure? The
liberty of quitting Edition: current; Page: [984] a position often makes
the whole difference between its being painful and pleasurable. Many a
person remains in the same town, street, or house from January to
December, without a wish or a thought tending towards removal, who if
confined to that same place by the mandate of authority, would find the
imprisonment absolutely intolerable.

According to the Fourierists, scarcely any kind of useful labour is
naturally and necessarily disagreeable, unless it is either regarded as
dishonourable, or is immoderate in degree, or destitute of the stimulus
of sympathy and emulation.]6 The few kinds of useful employment which
are inherently distasteful to either the physical or the moral sense, or
which would be so to persons in as high a state of cultivation as the
Fourierists rightly aspire to confer upon all, they propose to surround
with marks of honour, and to remunerate on the highest scale. [Excessive
toil needs not, they contend, be undergone by any one, in a society in
which there would be no idle class, and no labour wasted, as so enormous
an amount of labour is now wasted, in useless things; and where full
advantage would be taken of the power of association, both in increasing
the efficiency of production, and in economizing consumption. The other
requisites for rendering labour attractive would, they think, be found
in the execution of all labour by social groups, to any number of which
the same individual might simultaneously belong, at his or her own
choice; their grade in each being determined by the degree of service
which they were found capable of rendering, as appreciated by the
suffrages of their comrades. It is inferred from the diversity of tastes
and talents, that every member of the community would be attached to
several groups, employing themselves in various kinds of occupation,
some bodily, others mental, and would be capable of occupying a high
place in some one or more; so that a real equality, or]7 a [something
more nearly approaching to it than might at first be supposed, would
practically result: not]8 (as in Communism) [from the compression, but,
on the contrary, from the largest possible developement, of the various
natural superiorities residing in each individual.

Even from so brief an outline, it]9 will be perceived [that this system
does no violence to any of the general laws by which human action, even
in the present imperfect state of moral and intellectual cultivation, is
influenced]10. All persons would have a prospect of deriving individual
advantage from every degree of labour, of abstinence, and of talent,
which they individually exercised. The impediments to success would not
be in the principles of the system, but in the unmanageable nature of
its machinery. Edition: current; Page: [985] Before large bodies of
human beings could be fit to live together in such close union, and
still more, before they would be capable of adjusting, by peaceful
arrangement among themselves, the relative claims of every class or kind
of labour and talent, and of every individual in every class, a vast
improvement in human character must be presupposed. When it is
considered that each person who would have a voice in this adjustment
would be a party interested in it, in every sense of the term—that each
would be called on to take part by vote in fixing both the relative
remuneration, and the relative estimation, of himself as compared with
all other labourers, and of his own class of labour or talent as
compared with all others; the degree of disinterestedness and of freedom
from vanity and irritability, which would be required in such a
community from every individual in it, would be such as is now only
found in the élite of humanity: while if these qualities fell much short
of the required standard, either the adjustment could not be made at
all, or if made by a majority, would engender jealousies and
disappointments destructive of the internal harmony on which the whole
working of the system avowedly depends. These, it is true, are
difficulties, not impossibilities: and the Fourierists, who alone among
Socialists are in a great degree alive to the true conditions of the
problem which they undertake to solve, are not without ways and means of
contending against these. With every advance in education and
improvement, their system tends to become less impracticable, and the
very attempt to make it succeed would cultivate in those making the
attempt, many of the virtues which it requires. But we have only yet
considered the case of a single Fourierist community. When we remember
that the communities themselves are to be the constituent units of an
organised whole, (otherwise competition would rage as actively between
rival communities as it now does between individual merchants or
manufacturers,) and that nothing less would be requisite for the
complete success of the scheme, than the organisation from a single
centre, of the whole industry of a nation, and even of the world; we
may, without attempting to limit the ultimate capabilities of human
nature, affirm, that the political economist, for a considerable time to
come, will be chiefly concerned with the conditions of existence and
progress belonging to a society founded on private property and
individual competition; and that, rude as is the manner in which those
two principles apportion reward to exertion and to merit, they must form
the basis of the principal improvements which can for the present be
looked for in the economical condition of humanity.

§ 6. [The institution of property requires, not subversion, but
improvement] And those improvements will be found to be far more
considerable than the adherents of the various Socialist systems are
willing to allow. Edition: current; Page: [986] Whatever may be the
merit or demerit of their own schemes of society, they have hitherto
shown themselves extremely ill acquainted with the economical laws of
the existing social system; and have, in consequence, habitually assumed
as necessary effects of competition, evils which are by no means
inevitably attendant on it. It is from the influence of this erroneous
interpretation of existing facts, that many Socialists of high
principles and attainments are led to regard the competitive system as
radically incompatible with the economical well-being of the mass.a

[The principle of private property has never yet had a fair trial in any
country; and less so, perhaps, in this country than in some others. The
social arrangements of modern Europe commenced from a distribution of
property which was the result, not of ajust partition, or acquisition by
industry,a but of conquest and violence: and notwithstanding what
industry has been doing for many centuries to modify the work of force,
the system still retains many band largeb traces of its origin. The laws
of property have never yet conformed to the principles on which the
justification of private property rests. They have made property of
things which never ought to be property, and absolute property where
only a qualified property ought to exist. They have not held the balance
fairly between human beings, but have heaped impediments upon some, to
give advantage to others; they have purposely fostered inequalities, and
prevented all from starting fair in the race. That all should indeed
start on perfectly equal terms, is inconsistent with any law of private
property: but if as much pains as has been taken to aggravate the
inequality of chances arising from the natural working of the principle,
had been taken to temper that inequality by every means not subversive
of the principle itself; if the tendency of legislation had been to
favour the diffusion, instead of the concentration of wealth—to
encourage the subdivision of the large masses, instead of striving to
keep them together; the principle of individual property would have been
found to have no cnecessaryc connexion with the physical and social
evils which]1 have made so many minds turn eagerly to any prospect of
relief, however desperate.

d[We are]2 as yet [too ignorant either of what individual agency in its
best form, or Socialism in its best form can accomplish, to be qualified
to decide which of the two will be the ultimate form of human society.]3
In Edition: current; Page: [987] the present stage of human improvement
at least, it is not (I conceive) the subversion of the system of
individual property that should be aimed at, but the improvement of it,
and the participation of every member of the community in its benefits.
Far, however, from looking upon the various classes of Socialists with
any approach to disrespect, I honour the intentions of almost all who
are publicly known in that character, the acquirements and talents of
several, and I regard them, taken collectively, as one of the most
valuable elements of human improvement now existing; both from the
impulse they give to the reconsideration and discussion of all the most
important questions, and from the ideas they have contributed to many;
ideas from which the most advanced supporters of the existing order of
society have still much to learn.d

Edition: current; Page: [988]


Appendix B

Book II, Chapter x (“Means of Abolishing Cottier Tenancy”), §§ 1-7, 2nd
edition (1849), collated with the 1st edition and the MS1

§ 1. [Mode of disposing of a cottier population is the vital question
for Ireland] The question, what is to be done with a cottier population?
which in any case would have been a fit subject for consideration in a
work like the present, is to the English Government at this time [the
most urgent of practical questions. The majority of a population of
eight millions, having long grovelled in helpless inertness and abject
poverty under the cottier system; reduced by its operation to mere food,
of the cheapest description, and to an incapacity of either doing or
willing anything for the improvement of their lot]2; have [at last, by
the failure of that lowest quality of food, been plunged into a state a
in which the alternative]3 is [death, or to be permanently supported by
other people, or a radical change in the economical arrangements under
which it]4 has [hitherto been their misfortune to live. Such an
emergency]5 has [compelled attention to the subject from the legislature
and from the nation, but it]6 can [hardly] as yet [be said, with much
result; for, the evil having originated in a system of land tenancy
which withdrew from the people every motive to industry or thrift except
the fear of starvation, the remedy provided by Parliament was to take
away even that, by conferring on them a legal claim to eleemosynary
support: while, towards correcting the cause of the mischief, nothing
was done, beyond vain complaints, though at the price to the national
treasury of ten millions sterling for] one year’s [delay.]7

Edition: current; Page: [989]
I presume it [is needless] [to expend any argument in proving that the
very foundation of the economical evils of Ireland is the cottier
system: that while peasant rents fixed by competition are the practice
of the country, to expect industry, useful activity, any restraint on
population but death, or any the smallest diminution of poverty, is to
look for figs on thistles and grapes on thorns. If our practical
statesmen are not ripe for the recognition of this fact; or if while
they acknowledge it in theory, they have not a sufficient feeling of its
reality, to be capable of founding upon it any course of conduct; there
is still another, and a purely physical consideration, from which they
will find it impossible to escape. If the one crop on which the people
have hitherto supported themselves continues to be precarious, either
some new and great impulse must be given to agricultural skill and
industry, or the soil of Ireland can no longer feed any thing like its
present population. The whole produce of the western half of the island,
leaving nothing for rent, will not now keep permanently in existence the
whole of its people: and they will necessarily remain an annual charge
on the taxation of the empire, until they are reduced either by
emigration or by starvation to a number corresponding with the low state
of their industry, or unless the means are found of making that industry
much more productive.]8

Cottiers, therefore, must cease to be. Nothing can be done for Ireland
without transforming her rural population from cottier tenants into
something else. But into what? [Those who, knowing neither Ireland nor
any foreign country, take as their sole standard of social and
economical excellence, English practice, propose as the single remedy
for Irish wretchedness, the transformation of the cottiers into hired
labourers.]9 I contend that the object should be their transformation,
as far as circumstances admit, into landed proprietors. Either, indeed,
would be a most desirable exchange from the present nuisance; but as a
practical object the latter of the two seems to me preferable in an
almost incalculable degree to the former, both as the most desirable in
itself, and very much the easiest to effect.

§ 2. [To convert the cottiers into hired labourers is not desirable or
practicable] To convert the cottiers into hired labourers [is rather a
scheme for the improvement of Irish agriculture, than of the condition
of the Irish people. The status of a day labourer has no charm for
infusing forethought, frugality, or self-restraint, into a people devoid
of them.]1 It is not necessarily injurious to those qualities where they
exist, but it seldom engenders them where they are absent. [If the Irish
peasantry could be] instantaneously Edition: current; Page: [990]
[changed into receivers of wages,]2 the wages being no higher than they
now are, or than there is any reason to hope that they would be, and the
present [habits and mental characteristics of the people remaining, we
should merely see] five or six [millions of people living as day
labourers in the same wretched manner in which as cottiers they lived
before; equally passive in the absence of every comfort, equally
reckless in multiplication, and even, perhaps, equally listless at their
work; since they could not be dismissed] en masse [, and if they could,
dismissal would now be simply remanding them to the poor-rate. Far other
would be the effect of making them peasant proprietors. A people who in
industry and providence have everything to learn—who are confessedly
among the most backward of European populations in the industrial
virtues—require for their regeneration the most powerful incitements by
which those virtues can be stimulated: and there is no stimulus]
[comparable to property in land. A permanent interest in the soil to
those who till it, is almost a guarantee for the most unwearied
laboriousness: against over-population, though not infallible, it is the
best preservative yet known; and where it failed, any other plan would
probably fail much more egregiously; the evil would be beyond the reach
of merely aeconomica remedies.]3 Having already insisted so strongly on
these topics, I feel it needless to argue any further, that the
conversion of the Irish peasantry, or of some considerable portion of
them, into small landed proprietors, is a more beneficial object than
the transformation of all of them indiscriminately into labourers for
hire.

But besides being more desirable, it is, above all, more attainable. The
other plan, as a measure standing by itself, is wholly impracticable. It
involves contradictory conditions. The conversion of the cottiers into
hired labourers implies the introduction, all over Ireland, of
capitalist farmers, in lieu of the present small tenants. These farmers,
or their capital at least, must come from England. But to induce capital
to come in, the cottier population must first be peaceably got rid of:
in other words, that must be already accomplished, which English capital
is proposed as the means of accomplishing. Why is Ireland the only
country in the world to which English capital does not go? Because it
cannot go to any purpose without turning out the people, and the people
refuse to be turned out. I presume it is not seriously proposed that
they should be turned out en masse, without being otherwise provided
for. With their own consent they never will be dislodged from their
holdings until something better is given to them. They will not be got
rid of by merely telling them that something better will follow.

Edition: current; Page: [991]
It is necessary however in the next place to consider, what is the
condition of things which would follow. The ineffective Irish
agriculture is to be converted into an effective English agriculture, by
throwing together the small holdings into large farms, cultivated by
combined labour, with the best modern improvements. On the supposition
of success, Ireland would be assimilated, in her agriculture, to the
most improved parts of England. But what are the most improved parts of
England? Those in which fewest labourers are employed, in proportion to
the extent of the soil. Taking the number of Irish peasants to the
square mile, and the number of hired labourers on an equal space in the
model counties of Scotland or England, the former number is commonly
computed to be about three times the latter. Two-thirds, therefore, of
the Irish peasantry, would be absolutely dispensed with. What is to be
done with them? Is it supposed that they would find employment in
manufacturing labour? They are at present unfit for it; and even if fit,
capital would require to be imported for that purpose too; and is it
likely that manufacturing capital will resort to Ireland, abandoning
Leeds and Manchester? Under a more efficient cultivation of her soil,
Ireland would require a greatly increased amount of manufactured goods,
but these would still be most advantageously manufactured in Lancashire
or Yorkshire; and even if Ireland became, as to agricultural
improvement, an English county, she would be but a larger Devonshire,
drawing everything which she consumed, except the products of
agriculture, from elsewhere. All the excess of Irish population above
the Devonshire standard would be a local surplus, which must migrate to
England, or to America, or subsist on taxation or bcharity, or must be
enabled to raise its own food from its own soil. The plan therefore of
turning the cottiers into labourers for wages, even if it fulfilled its
utmost promise, only disposes of a third of the population; with respect
to the remaining two-thirds, the original difficulty recurs in its full
force.

The question, what system of agriculture is best in itself, is, for
Ireland, of purely theoretical interest: the people are there, and the
problem is not how to improve the country, but how it can be improved by
and for its present inhabitants. It is not probable that England will
undertake a simultaneous removal of two millions—the smallest number
which in the opinion of any person acquainted with the subject, would
make a clear field for the introduction of English agriculture. But
unless she does, the soil of Ireland must continue to employ and feed
the people of Ireland: and since it cannot do this on the English
system, or on any system whatever of large farming, all idea of cthatc
species of agricultural improvement as an exclusive Edition: current;
Page: [992] thing must be abandoned: the petite culture din some one of
its shapesd will continue, and a large proportion of the peasants, eif
they do not become small proprietors, will remaine small farmers. In the
few cases in which comprehensive measures of agricultural improvement
have been undertaken by large capitals, the capitalists have not, as
some might perhaps suppose, employed themselves in creating large farms,
and cultivating them by hired labour; their farms are of a size only
sufficient for a single family: it was by other expedients that the
improvement, which was to render the enterprise profitable, was brought
about: these were, advances of capital, and a temporary security of
tenure. There is a Company called the Irish Waste Land Improvement
Society, of whose operations, in 1845, the following report was made, by
their intelligent manager, Colonel Robinson.*

[ f“Two hundred and forty-five tenants, many of whom were a few years
since in a state bordering on pauperism, the occupiers of small holdings
of from ten to twenty plantation acres each, have, by their own free
labour, with the Society’s aid, improved their farms to the value of
4396l.; 605l. having been added during the last year, being at the rate
of 17l. 18s. per tenant for the whole term, and 2l. 9s. for the past
year; the benefit of which improvements each tenant will enjoy during
the unexpired term of a] thirty-one years lease.

[“These 245 tenants and their families, have, by spade] husbandry [,
reclaimed and brought into cultivation 1032 plantation acres of land,
previously unproductive mountain waste, upon which they grew, last year,
crops valued by competent practical persons at 3896l., being in the
proportion of 15l. 18s., each tenant; and their live stock, consisting
of cattle, horses, sheep, and pigs, now actually upon the estates, is
valued, according to the present prices of the neighbouring markets, at
4162l., of which 1304l. has been added since February 1844, being at the
rate of 16l. 19s. for the whole period, and 5l. 6s. for the last year;
during which time their stock has thus increased in value a sum equal to
their present annual rent; and by the statistical] table [and returns
referred to in previous reports, it is proved that the tenants, in
general, improve their little farms, and increase their cultivation and
crops, in nearly direct proportion to the number of available working
persons of both sexes of which their families consist.”

There cannot be a stronger testimony to the superior amount of] gross
[produce raised by small farming, under any tolerable system of landed
Edition: current; Page: [993] tenure: and it is worthy of attention,
that the industry and zeal] are [greatest among the smaller holders:
Colonel Robinson noticing as exceptions to the remarkable and rapid
progress of improvement, some tenants] “who are [occupants of larger
farms than twenty acres, a class too often deficient in the enduring
industry indispensable for the successful prosecution of mountain
improvements.”]*4

§ 3. [Limitation of rent, by law or custom, is indispensable] [The case
of Ireland is similar in its requirements to that of India. In India,
though great errors have from time to time been committed, no one ever
proposed, under the name of agricultural improvement, to eject the ryots
or peasant farmers from their possession;] all [the improvement that has
been looked for, has been through making their tenure more secure to
them, and the sole difference of opinion is between those who contend
for aperpetuity, and those who think that long leases will suffice. The
same question] may exist [as to Ireland];1 and with the case of the
Waste Lands Improvement Society before us, as well as many other
instances of reclamation of land, recorded by Lord Devon’s Commission,
[it would be idle to deny that long leases, under such landlords as are
sometimes to be found, do effect wonders, even in Ireland. But then,
they must be leases at a low rent. Long leases are in no way to be
relied on for getting rid of cottierism. During the existence of cottier
tenancy, leases have always been long; twenty-one years and three lives
concurrent, was a usual term. But the rent being fixed by competition,
at a higher amount than could be paid, so that the tenant neither had,
nor could by any exertion acquire, a beneficial interest in the land,
the advantage of a lease was] merely [nominal. In India, the
government]2 [is able to prevent this evil, because, being itself the
landlord, it can fix the rent according to its own judgment; but under
individual landlords, while rents are fixed by competition, and the
competitors are a peasantry struggling for subsistence, nominal rents
are inevitable, unless the population is so thin, that the competition
itself is only nominal. The majority of landlords will grasp at
immediate money and immediate power; and so long as they find cottiers
eager to offer them every thing, it is useless to rely on them for
tempering the vicious practice by a considerate self-denial.

Edition: current; Page: [994]
A perpetuity is a]3 preferable tenure to a long lease; it is a far
stronger stimulus to improvement[: not only because the longest lease,
before coming to an end, passes through all the varieties of short
leases down to no lease at all; but for more fundamental reasons. It is
very shallow, even in pure economics, to take no account of the
influence of imagination: there is a virtue in “for ever” beyond the
longest term of years; even if the term is long enough to include
children, and all whom a person individually cares for,]4 [he will not
exert himself with the same ardour to increase the value of an estate,
his interest in which diminishes in value every year.]5 A lease,
therefore, is never a complete substitute for a perpetuity. [But where a
country is under cottier tenure, the question of perpetuity is quite
secondary to the more important point, a limitation of the rent. Rent
paid by a bcapitalist who farmsb for profit, and not for bread, may
safely be abandoned to competition; rent paid by labourers cannot,
unless the labourers were in a state of civilization and improvement
which labourers have nowhere yet reached, and cannot easily reach under
such a tenure. Peasant rents ought never to be arbitrary, never at the
discretion of the landlord: either by custom or law, it is imperatively
necessary that they should be fixed; and where no mutually advantageous
custom, such as the metayer system of Tuscany, has established itself,
reason and experience recommend that they should be fixed] in
perpetuity[: thus changing the rent into a quit-rent, and the farmer
into a peasant proprietor.]6

§ 4. [Fixity of Tenure considered] Let us, then, examine what means are
afforded by the economical circumstances of Ireland, for [carrying this
change into effect on a sufficiently large scale to accomplish the
complete abolition of cottier tenancy]. The [mode which] first [suggests
itself is the] obvious and [direct one, of doing the thing outright by
Act of Parliament; making the whole land of Ireland the property of the
tenants, subject to the rents now really paid (not the nominal] rents[),
as a fixed rent charge. This, under the name of “fixity of tenure,” was
one of the demands of the Repeal Association during the most successful
period of their agitation; and was better expressed by Mr. Conner, its
earliest, most enthusiastic, and most indefatigable apostle,* by the
words, “a valuation and a perpetuity.” In] this [measure there would
not], strictly speaking, be [any injustice, Edition: current; Page:
[995] provided the landlords were compensated for the present value of
the chances of increase which they] would be [prospectively required to
forego. The rupture of existing social relations would hardly] be [more
violent than that effected by the ministers Stein and Hardenberg, when,
by a series of edicts, in the early part of the present century, they
revolutionized the state of landed property in the Prussian monarchy,
and left their names to posterity among the greatest benefactors of
their country. To enlightened foreigners writing on Ireland, Von Raumer
and Gustave de Beaumont, a remedy of this sort] seems [so exactly and
obviously what the disease] requires[, that they] have [some difficulty
in comprehending how it] is [that the thing] is [not yet done.]1

But though this measure is not beyond the competence of a just
legislature, and would be no infringement of property if the landlords
had the option allowed them of giving up their lands at the full value,
reckoned at the ordinary number of years purchase; it is aonly fit to be
adopted if the nature of the case admitted of no milder remedya. In the
first place, it is [a complete expropriation of the higher classes of
Ireland: which, if there is any truth in the principles we have laid
down, would be perfectly warrantable, but only if it were the sole means
of effecting a great public good. bInb the second place, that there
should be none but peasant-proprietors, is in itself far from desirable.
Large farms, cultivated by large] capitals[, and owned by persons of the
best education which the country can give, persons qualified by
instruction to cappreciate scientific discoveriesc, and able to bear the
delay and risk of costly experiments, are an important part of a good
agricultural system. Many such landlords there are even in Ireland; and
it would be a public misfortune to drive them from their]2 post. Other
objections might be added; a [large proportion] [of the present holdings
are] [too small to try the proprietary system under the greatest
advantages: nor are the tenants always the persons one would desire to
select, as the first occupants of peasant-properties. There are numbers
of them on whom it would have a more beneficial effect to give them the
hope of acquiring a landed property by industry and frugality, than the
property itself in immediate possession.]3

§ 5. [Tenant Right] Some persons who desire to avoid the term fixity of
tenure, but who cannot be satisfied without some measure co-extensive
with the whole country, have proposed the universal adoption of
“tenant-right.” Edition: current; Page: [996] Under this equivocal
phrase, two things are confounded. What it commonly stands for in Irish
discussion, is the Ulster practice, which is in fact, fixity of tenure.
It supposes a customary, though not a legal, limitation of the rent;
without which the tenant evidently could not acquire a beneficial and
saleable interest. Its existence is highly salutary, and is one
principal cause of the superiority of Ulster in efficiency of
cultivation, and in the comfort of the people, notwithstanding a minuter
subdivision of holdings than in the other provinces. But to convert this
customary limitation of rent into a legal one, and to make it universal,
would be to establish aaa fixity of tenure by law, the objections to
which have already been stated.

The same appellation b(tenant right)b has of late years been applied,
more particularly in England, to something altogether different, and
falling as much short of the exigency, as the enforcement of the Ulster
custom would exceed it. This English tenant right, with which a high
agricultural authority has connected his name by endeavouring to obtain
for it legislative sanction, amounts to no more than this, that on the
expiration of a lease, the landlord should make compensation to the
tenant for “unexhausted improvements.” This is certainly very desirable,
but provides only for the case of capitalist farmers, and of
improvements made by outlay of money; of the worth and cost of which, an
experienced land agent or a jury of farmers could accurately judge. The
improvements to be looked for from peasant cultivators are the result
not of money but of their labour, applied at such various times and in
such minute portions as to be incapable of judicial appreciation. For
such labour, compensation could not be given on any principle but that
of paying to the tenant the whole difference between the value of the
property when he received it, and when he gave it up: which would as
effectually annihilate the right of property of the landlord as if the
rent had been fixed in perpetuity, while it would not offer the same
inducements to the cultivator, who improves from affection and passion
as much as from calculation, and to whom his own land is a widely
different thing from the most liberal possible pecuniary compensation
for it.

§ 6. [Location of peasant proprietors on the waste lands] There are then
strong objections, as well as great difficulties, opposed to the attempt
to make peasant properties universal. But, fortunately, that they should
be universal is not necessary to their usefulness. There is no need to
extend them to all the population, or all the land. It is enough if
there be land available, on which to locate so great a portion of the
population, that the remaining area of the country shall not be required
to maintain greater numbers than are compatible with large farming and
hired labour. For this Edition: current; Page: [997] purpose there is an
obvious resource in the waste lands; which are happily so extensive, and
a large proportion of them so improvable, as to afford a means by which,
without making the present tenants proprietors, nearly the whole surplus
population might be converted into peasant proprietors elsewhere. This
plan has been strongly pressed upon the public by several writers: but
the first to bring it prominently forward in England was Mr. William
Thornton, in a work* honourably distinguished from most others which
have been recently published, by its rational treatment of the great
questions affecting the economical condition of the labouring classes.a

The detailed estimate of an irrefragable authority, Mr. Griffith,
annexed to the Report of Lord Devon’s Commission, shows nearly a million
and a half of acres reclaimable for the spade or plough, some of them
with the promise of great fertility, and about two millions and a half
more, reclaimable for pasture:† the greater part being in most
convenient proximity to the principal masses of destitute population.
Besides these four millions of Edition: current; Page: [998] acres,
there are above two millions and a half,* pronounced by Mr. Griffith to
be unimprovable; but he is only speaking of reclamation for profit: it
is doubtful if there be any land, in a temperate climate, which cannot
be reclaimed and rendered productive by labourers themselves, under the
binducementb of a permanent property. Confining ourselves to the one and
a half million of arable first mentioned, it would furnish properties
averaging five acres each to three hundred thousand persons, cwhichc at
the rate of five persons to a family, a rather low rate for Ireland,
danswersd to a population of fifteen hundred thousand. Suppose such a
number drafted off to a state of independence and comfort, together with
a very moderate additional relief by emigration; and the introduction of
English capital and farming, over the remaining surface of Ireland,
would at once cease to be chimerical.†

“The improvement of wastes,” Mr. Thornton eobservese, “may perhaps be
thought to require a good deal of capital; but capital is principally
useful for its command of labour, and the Irish peasantry have quite
labour enough at their own disposal. Their misfortune is, that they have
so much. Their labour would not be the worse applied because they worked
for Edition: current; Page: [999] themselves, instead of for a
paymaster. So far is [large] capital from being indispensable for the
cultivation of barren tracts, that schemes of this kind, which could
only bring loss to a rich speculator, are successfully achieved by his
penniless rival. A capitalist must have a certain return for the money
he lays out, but the poor man expends nothing but his own superabundant
labour, which would be valueless if not so employed, so that his
returns, however small, are all clear profit. No man in his senses would
ever have thought of wasting money upon the original sand of the Pays de
Waes; but the hard-working boors who settled there two hundred years
ago, without any other stock than their industry, contrived to enrich
both themselves and the land, and indeed to make the latter the richest
in Europe. There is no soil so worthless that an English labourer will
not eagerly accept an allotment of it; and while the green valley, from
which some Highland community has been driven, is fast relapsing under
the superintendence of a wealthy sheep-farmer into its primitive
wildness, its former tenants are forming new patches of arable land on
the rock-strewn moors along the seacoast.”[*]

“The profit of reclaiming waste land,” says the Digest of Evidence to
Lord Devon’s Commission,† “will be best understood from a practice not
uncommon in Ireland, to which farmers sometimes resort. This consists in
giving the use of a small portion of it to a poor cottier or herdsman
for the first three crops, after which this improved portion is given up
to the farmer, and a fresh piece of the waste land is taken on the same
terms by the cottier.” Well may the compiler say, “Here we have the
example of the very poorest class in Ireland obtaining a livelihood by
the cultivation of waste land under the most discouraging and the least
remunerative circumstances that can well be imagined.”

It is quite worthy of the spirit which pervades the wretched attempts as
yet made to do good to Ireland, that this spectacle of the poorest of
mankind making the land valuable by their labour for the profit of other
people, who have done nothing to assist them, does not once strike Lord
Devon and his Commission as a thing which ought not to be. Mr. Thornton
strongly urges the claims of common justice and common sense.

“The colonists ought to be allowed to retain permanent possession of the
spots reclaimed by them. To employ them as labourers in bringing the
land into a remunerative condition, (see Report of Land Occupation
Commissioners), in order that it may then be let to some one else, while
they are sent to shift for themselves where they can, may be an
excellent mode of enriching the landlord, but must eventually aggravate
the sufferings of the poor. It is probably because this plan has been
generally practised, that Edition: current; Page: [1000] the reclamation
of waste land has hitherto done nothing for the benefit of the Irish
peasantry. If the latter are to derive any advantage from it, such of
them as may be located on the waste, should receive perpetual leases of
their respective allotments—should be made freeholders, in fact, or at
least perpetual tenants at a quit-rent. Such an appropriation of waste
land would of course require that compensation should be made to all who
previously possessed any interest in it. But the value of a legal
interest in land which cannot be enclosed or cultivated without
permission of the legislature, can only be proportionate to the actual
yearly produce; and as land in a natural state yields little or nothing,
all legal claims upon it might be bought up at a trifling expense, or
might be commuted for a very small annual payment to be made by the
settlers. Of the perfect competence of Parliament to direct some
arrangement of this kind, there can be no question. An authority which
compels individuals to part with their most valued property on the
slightest pretext of public convenience, and permits railway projectors
to throw down family mansions and cut up favourite pleasure grounds,
need not be very scrupulous about forcing the sale of boggy meadows or
mountain pastures, in order to obtain the means of curing the
destitution and misery of an entire people.”[*]

It would be desirable, and in most cases necessary, that the tracts of
land should be prepared for the labours of the peasant, by being drained
and intersected with roads at the expense of Government; the interest of
the sums so expended, and of the compensation paid for existing rights
to the waste land, being charged on it when reclaimed as a perpetual
quit-rent, redeemable at a moderate number of years’ purchase. The state
would thus incur no loss, while the advances made would give that
immediate employment to the surplus labour of Ireland, which if not
given in this manner, will assuredly have to be given in some other, not
only less useful, but far less likely to repay its cost. The millions
lavished during the famine in the almost nominal execution of useless
works, without any result but that of keeping the people alive, would,
if employed in a great operation on the waste lands, have been quite as
effectual for relieving immediate distress, and would have laid the
foundation broad and deep for something really deserving the name of
social improvement. But, as usual, it was thought better to throw away
money and exertion in a beaten track, than to take the responsibility of
the most advantageous investment of them in an untrodden one.

§ 7. [Resources supplementary to the waste lands] If after the
superabundant evidence elicited in the Irish inquiries, of the extent
and capability of improvement of the waste lands, the reader can doubt
their sufficiency for Edition: current; Page: [1001] home colonization
on such a scale as to effect with benefit to everybody the “clearing” of
all Ireland; there are yet other means, by which not a little could be
done in the dissemination of peasant proprietors over even the existing
area of cultivation. There is at the present time an experiment in
progress, in more than one part of England, for the creation of peasant
proprietors. The project is of Chartist origin, and its first colony is
now in full operation near Richmansworth, in Hertfordshire. The plan is
as follows:—Funds were raised aby subscription, and vested ina a
joint-stock company. With part of these funds an estate of several
hundred acres was bought. This estate was divided into portions of two,
three, and four acres, on each of which a house was erected by the
Association. These holdings were let to select labourers, to whom also
such sums were advanced as were thought to amount to a sufficient
capital for cultivation by spade labour. An annual payment, affording to
the Company an interest of five per cent on their outlay, was laid on
the several holdings as a fixed quit-rent, never in any circumstances to
be raised. The tenants bareb thus proprietors from the first, and their
redemption of the quit-rent, by saving from the produce of their labour,
is desired and calculated upon.

cThe originator of this experiment appears to have successfully repelled
(before a tribunal by no means prepossessed in his favour, a Committee
of the House of Commons) the imputations which were lavished upon his
project, and upon his mode of executing it. Should its issue ultimatelyc
be unfavourable, dthe cause of failure will be in the details of
management, not in the principle. These well-conceived arrangements
afford [a mode in which private capital may] co-operate [in renovating
the social and agricultural economy of Ireland, not only without
sacrifice but with considerable profit to its owners. The remarkable
success of the Waste Land Improvement Society, which proceeded on a plan
far less advantageous to the tenant, is an instance of what an Irish
peasantry can be stimulated to do, by a sufficient assurance that what
they do will be for their own advantage. It is not] [indispensable to]1
begin at once with a perpetuity[; long leases at moderate rents, like
those of the Waste Land Society, would suffice, if a prospect were held
out to the farmers of being allowed to purchase their farms with the
capital which they might acquire, as the Society’s tenants were so
rapidly acquiring under the influence of its beneficent system.]2 It
would be a boon to allow them to become purchasers of the land even
Edition: current; Page: [1002] at the value given to it by their own
labour: and though, on the part of government, to take such an advantage
of their exertions would be most ungenerous and illiberal, it would be
allowable in private capitalists undertaking a work of national benefit
as an advantageous investment of capital. [eWhen the lands weree sold,
the funds of the association would be liberated, and it might recommence
operations in some other quarter.]3

Nor is it only by joint-stock associations, and the introduction of
English capital, that this system might be acted upon: it would be most
advantageous to every individual landowner in the distressed counties,
who has any funds which he can freely dispose of. Under the new Irish
poor law, there are no means for the landlords of escaping ruin, unless,
by some potent stimulant to the industrial energies of the people, they
can largely increase the produce of agriculture: and since there is no
stimulant available, so potent as a permanent interest in the soil,
either the present landlords, or those English mortgagees to whom the
estates of the more impoverished landowners must inevitably pass, would
find it to their advantage, if not to grant at once this permanent
interest to their tenants, at least to hold out to them the prospect of
acquiring it. The government, too, into whose hands no small portion of
the land of Ireland may be expected to fall, in consequence of unrepaid
advances, either past or yet to come, will have a noble opportunity of
rendering the acquisition instrumental to the formation of a peasant
proprietary: but, to the state, it would be most discreditable to seek
for profit at the expense of the peasantry; and whether the fownershipsf
were granted immediately or only held out in prospect, the rent or price
should be no more than sufficient to repay the state for its advances.

Edition: current; Page: [1003]


Appendix C

Book II, Chapter x (“Means of Abolishing Cottier Tenancy”), § 3, 4th
edition (1857), collated with the earlier editions and the MS1

a§ 3.a [Probable consequences of the measures recommended] When the
bdifficulties of governing a country whose social system requires not
ordinary amendment but radical change,b shall be met instead of cbeingc
evaded, by men capable of rising superior both to their own indolence
and prejudices and to those of others; we may hope to see, from the
present lazy, apathetic, reckless, improvident and lawless Ireland, a
new Ireland arise, consisting of peasant proprietors with something to
lose, and of hired labourers with something to gain; the former
dpeaceful and industriousd through the possession of property, the
latter through the hope of it; while the agriculture of eIreland would
be fpartlyf conducted on the best system of small cultivation, gand
partlyg on the best principles of large farming and combination of
labour. hNor wouldh it be too much to hope, that when the number of
hired labourers was duly proportioned to the soil on which they were
employed, and a peaceful “clearing” had made the country safe for
English capital to dwell in, the rate of wages would be sufficient to
establish a tolerably high standard of living; and ithati the spirit of
saving, fostered by the desire of acquiring land, jmightj prevent that
standard from being again depressed through an imprudent increase of
kpopulation.k

Edition: current; Page: [1004]
In the complication of human affairs, the actual effects of causes,
whether salutary or injurious, remain always far short of their
tendencies. But history is not without examples of changes, similar in
kind to that which I have been sketching, and the results of them are
not uninstructive. [lThree times during the course of] French history,
[the peasantry have been purchasers of land; and these times immediately
preceded the three principal eras of French agricultural prosperity.

“Aux temps les plus mauvais,” says the historian Michelet,* “aux moments
de pauvreté universelle, où le riche même est pauvre et vend par force,
alors le pauvre se trouve en état d’acheter; nul acquéreur ne se
présentant, le paysan en guenilles arrive avec sa pièce d’or, et il
acquiert un bout de terre. Ces moments de désastre où le paysan a pu
acquérir la terre à bon marché, ont toujours été suivis d’un élan subit
de fécondité qu’on ne s’expliquait pas. Vers 1500, par exemple, quand la
France épuisée par Louis XI. semble achever sa ruine en Italie, la
noblesse qui part est obligée de vendre; la terre, passant à de
nouvelles mains, refleurit tout-à-coup; on travaille, on bâtit. Ce beau
moment (dans le style de l’histoire monarchique) s’est appelé le bon
Louis XII.

“Il dure peu, malheureusement. La terre est à peine remise en bon état,
le fisc fond dessus; les guerres de religion arrivent, qui semblent
raser tout jusqu’au sol, misères horribles, famines atroces où les mères
mangeaient leurs enfants. Qui croirait que le pays se relève de là? Eh
bien, la guerre finit à peine, de ce champ ravagé, de cette chaumière
encore noire et brulée, sort l’épargne du paysan. Il achète; en dix ans,
la France a changé de face; en vingt ou trente, tous les biens ont
doublé, triplé de valeur. Ce moment encore baptisé d’un nom royal,
s’appelle le bon Henri IV. et le grand Richelieu.”

Of the third era it is needless magainm to speak: it was that of the
Revolution.

Whoever would study the reverse of the picture, may compare these
historic periods, characterized by the dismemberment of large and the
construction of small properties, with the wide-spread national
suffering which accompanied, and the permanent deterioration of the
condition of the labouring classes which followed, the “clearing” away
of small yeomen to make room for large grazing farms, which was the
grand economical event of English history during the sixteenth
century.l]2

[I have concluded a discussion, which has] already [occupied a space
almost disproportioned to the dimensions of this work; and I here close
the Edition: current; Page: [1005] examination of those simpler forms of
social economy in which the produce of the land either belongs
undividedly to one class, or is shared only between two classes. We now
proceed to the hypothesis of a threefold division of the produce, among
labourers, landlords, and capitalists: and in order to connect the
coming discussions as closely as possible with those which have now for
some time occupied us, I shall commence with the subject of Wages.]3

Edition: current; Page: [1006]


Appendix D

Book IV, Chapter vii (“On the Probable Futurity of the Labouring
Classes”), §§ 5-6, 2nd edition (1849), collated with the 1st edition.1

§ 5. [Examples of the association of the labourers in the profits of
industrial undertakings] aIt is this feeling, almost as much as despair
of the improvement of the condition of the labouring masses by other
means, which has caused so great a multiplication of projects for the
“organization of industry” by the extension and development of the
co-operative or joint stock principle: some of the more conspicuous of
which have been described and characterized in an early chapter of this
work. It is most desirable that all these schemes should have
opportunity and encouragement to test their capabilities by actual
experiment. There are, in almost all of them, many features, in
themselves well worth submitting to that test; while, on the other hand,
the exaggerated expectations entertained by large and growing multitudes
in all the principal nations of the world, concerning what it is
possible, in the present state of human improvement, to effect by such
means, have no chance of being corrected except by a fair trial in
practice. The French Revolution of February 1848, at first seemed to
have opened a fair field for the trial of such experiments, on a
perfectly safe scale, and with every advantage that could be derived
from the countenance of a government which sincerely desired their
success. It is much to be regretted that these prospects have been
frustrated, and that the reaction of the middle class against
anti-property doctrines has engendered for the present an unreasoning
and undiscriminating antipathy to all ideas, however harmless or however
just, which have the smallest savour of Socialism. Edition: current;
Page: [1007] This is a disposition of mind, of which the influential
classes, both in France and elsewhere, will find it necessary to divest
themselves. Socialism has now become irrevocably one of the leading
elements in European politics. The questions raised by it will not be
set at rest by merely refusing to listen to it; but only by a more and
more complete realization of the ends which Socialism aims at, not
neglecting its means so far as they can be employed with advantage.

On the particular point specially considered in the present chapter,
those means have been, to a certain extent, put in practice in several
departments of existing industry; by arrangements giving toa [every one
who contributes to the work,]2 whether [by labour or by pecuniary
resources,]3b [a partner’s interest in it,]4 proportionally [to the
value of his contribution. It is already a common practice to remunerate
those in whom peculiar trust is reposed by means of a percentage on the
profits; and cases exist in which the principle is, with]5 the most
[excellent success, carried down to the class of mere manual labourers.

In the American ships trading to China, it has long been the custom for
every sailor to have an interest in the profits of the voyage; and to
this has been ascribed the general good conduct of those seamen, and the
extreme rarity of any collision between them and the government or
people of the country. An instance in England]6 itself[, not so well
known as it deserves to be, is that of the Cornish miners. “In Cornwall
the mines are worked strictly on the system of joint adventure; gangs of
miners contracting with the agent, who represents the owner of the mine,
to execute a certain portion of a vein, and fit the ore for market, at
the price of so much in the pound of the sum for which the ore is sold.
These contracts are put up at certain regular periods, generally every
two months, and taken by a voluntary partnership of men accustomed to
the mine. This system has its disadvantages, in consequence of the
uncertainty and irregularity of the earnings, and consequent necessity
of living for long periods on credit; but it has advantages which more
than counterbalance these drawbacks. It produces a degree of
intelligence, independence, and moral elevation, which raise the
condition and character of the Cornish miner far above that of the
generality of the labouring class. We are told by Dr. Barham, that ‘they
are not only, as a class, intelligent for labourers, but men of
considerable knowledge.’ Also, that ‘they have a character of
independence, something American, the system by which the contracts are
let giving the takers entire freedom to make arrangements among
themselves; Edition: current; Page: [1008] so that each man feels, as a
partner in his little firm, that he meets his employers on nearly equal
terms.’ . . . With this basis of intelligence and independence in their
character, we are not surprised when we hear that ‘a very great number
of miners are now located on possessions of their own, leased for three
lives or ninety-nine years, on which they have built houses;’ or that
‘281,541l. are deposited in]7 savings [banks in Cornwall, of which
two-thirds are estimated to belong to miners.’ ”*

Mr. Babbage, who also gives an account of this system, observes† that
the payment to the crews of whaling ships is governed by a similar
principle; and that “the profits arising from fishing with nets on the
south coast of England are thus divided: one-half the produce belongs to
the owner of the boat and net; the other half is divided in equal
portions between the persons using it, who are also bound to assist in
repairing the net when required.” Mr. Babbage has the great merit of
having pointed out the practicability, and the advantage, of extending
the principle to manufacturing industry generally.]8 I venture to quote
the principal part of his observations on the subject.

“The general principles on which the proposed system is founded,
are—1st. That a considerable part of the wages received by each person
employed, should depend on the profits made by the establishment; and
2nd. That every person connected with it should derive more advantage
from applying any improvement he might discover, to the factory in which
he is employed, than he could by any other course.

“It would be difficult to prevail on the large capitalist to enter upon
any system, which would change the division of the profits arising from
the employment of his capital in setting skill and labour in action; any
alteration, therefore, must be expected rather from the small
capitalist, or from the higher class of workmen, who combine the two
characters; and to these latter classes, whose welfare will be first
affected, the change is most important. I shall therefore first point
out the course to be pursued in making the experiment; and then, taking
a particular branch of trade as an illustration, I shall examine the
merits and defects of the proposed system as applied to it.

“Let us suppose, in some large manufacturing town, ten or twelve of the
most intelligent and skilful workmen to unite, whose characters for
sobriety Edition: current; Page: [1009] and steadiness are good, and are
well known among their class. Such persons will each possess some small
portion of capital; and let them join with one or two others who have
raised themselves into the class of small master-manufacturers, and
therefore possess rather a larger portion of capital. Let these persons,
after well considering the subject, agree to establish a manufactory of
fire-irons and fenders; and let us suppose that each of the ten workmen
can command forty pounds, and each of the small capitalists possesses
two hundred pounds: thus they have a capital of 800l., with which to
commence business, and for the sake of simplifying, let us further
suppose the labour of each of these twelve persons to be worth two
pounds a week. One portion of their capital will be expended in
procuring the tools necessary for their trade, which we shall take at
400l., and this must be considered as their fixed capital. The remaining
400l. must be employed as circulating capital, in purchasing the iron
with which their articles are made, in paying the rent of their
workshops, and in supporting themselves and their families until some
portion of it is replaced by the sale of the goods produced.

“Now the first question to be settled is, what proportion of the profit
should be allowed for the use of capital, and what for skill and labour?
It does not seem possible to decide this question by any abstract
reasoning: if the capital supplied by each partner is equal, all
difficulty will be removed; if otherwise, the proportion must be left to
find its level, and will be discovered by experience; and it is probable
that it will not fluctuate much. Suppose it to be agreed that the
capital of 800l. shall receive the wages of one workman. At the end of
each week, every workman is to receive one pound as wages, and one pound
is to be divided amongst the owners of the capital. After a few weeks
the returns will begin to come in; and they will soon become nearly
uniform. Accurate accounts should be kept of every expense and of all
the sales; and at the end of each week the profit should be divided. A
certain portion should be laid aside as a reserved fund, another portion
for repair of the tools, and the remainder being divided into thirteen
parts, one of these parts would be divided amongst the capitalists and
one belong to each workman. Thus each man would, in ordinary
circumstances, make up his usual wages of two pounds weekly. If the
factory went on prosperously, the wages of the men would increase; if
the sales fell off, they would be diminished. It is important that every
person employed in the establishment, whatever might be the amount paid
for his services, whether he act as labourer or porter, or as the clerk
who keeps the accounts, or as book-keeper employed for a few hours once
a week to superintend them, should receive one-half of what his service
is worth in fixed salary, the other part varying with the success of the
undertaking.

Edition: current; Page: [1010]
“The result of such arrangements in a factory would be,

“1. That every person engaged in it would have a direct interest in its
prosperity; since the effect of any success, or falling off, would
almost immediately produce a corresponding change in his own weekly
receipts.

“2. Every person concerned in the factory would have an immediate
interest in preventing any waste or mismanagement in all the
departments.

“3. The talents of all connected with it would be strongly directed to
improvement in every department.

“4. None but workmen of high character and qualifications could obtain
admission into such establishments, because when any additional hands
were required, it would be the common interest of all to admit only the
most respectable and skilful, and it would be far less easy to impose
upon a dozen workmen than upon the single proprietor of a factory.

“5. When any circumstance produced a glut in the market, more skill
would be directed to diminishing the cost of production; and a portion
of the time of the men might then be occupied in repairing and improving
their tools, for which a reserved fund would pay, thus checking present,
and at the same time facilitating future production.

“6. Another advantage, of no small importance, would be the total
removal of all real or imaginary causes for combinations. The workmen
and the capitalist would so shade into each other—would so evidently
have a common interest, and their difficulties and distresses would be
mutually so well understood, that instead of combining to oppress one
another, the only combination which could exist would be a most powerful
union between both parties to overcome their common difficulties.

“One of the difficulties attending such a system is, that capitalists
would at first fear to embark in it, imagining that the workmen would
receive too large a share of the profits: and it is quite true that the
workmen would have a larger share than at present: but at the same time,
it is presumed the effect of the whole system would be, that the total
profits of the establishment being much increased, the smaller
proportion allowed to capital under this system would yet be greater in
actual amount, than that which results to it from the larger share in
the system now existing.

“A difficulty would occur also in discharging workmen who behaved ill,
or who were not competent to their work; this would arise from their
having a certain interest in the reserved fund, and perhaps from their
possessing a certain portion of the capital employed; but without
entering into detail, it may be observed, that such cases might be
determined on by meetings of the whole establishment; and that if the
policy of the laws favoured such establishments, it would scarcely be
more difficult to enforce just regulations than it now is to enforce
some which are unjust by means of combinations either amongst the
masters or the men.”[*]

Edition: current; Page: [1011]
In this imaginary case, it is supposed that each labourer brings some
small portion of capital into the concern: but the principle is equally
applicable to the ordinary case, in which the whole capital belongs to
an individual capitalist. An application of it to such a case is
actually in progress, by a Paris tradesman, a house-painter, M.
Leclaire.* The intelligent author of this meritorious experiment,
published a pamphlet in the year 1842, descriptive of his system of
operations; to which attention was first directed by M. Duveyrier, in
his Lettres Politiques, and a full abstract of which has been published
in Chambers’ Journal.† M. Leclaire [employs on an average two hundred
workmen, whom he pays in the usual manner, by fixed wages or salaries.
He assigns to himself, besides interest for his capital, a fixed
allowance for his labour and responsibility as manager. At the end of
the year, the surplus profits are divided among the cbody, himself
included, in the proportion of their dsalaries.‡ The reasons by which M.
Leclaire was led to adopt this system are]9 interesting and
[instructive. Finding the conduct of his workmen unsatisfactory, he
first tried the effect of giving higher wages, and by this he managed to
obtain a body of excellent workmen, who would not quit his service for
any other. “Having thus succeeded” (I quote from]10 the [abstract] [in
Chambers’ Journal,] “in producing some sort of stability in the]
arrangements [of his establishment, M. Leclaire expected, he says, to
enjoy greater peace of mind. In this, however, he was disappointed. So
long as he was able to superintend everything himself, from the general
concerns of his business down to its minutest details, he did enjoy a
certain satisfaction; but from the moment that, owing to the increase of
his business, he found that he could be nothing more than the centre
from which orders were issued, and to which reports were brought in, his
former anxiety and discomfort returned upon him.” He speaks lightly of
the other sources of anxiety to which a tradesman is subject, but
describes as an incessant cause of vexation the losses arising from the
misconduct of workmen. An employer “will find workmen whose indifference
to his interests is such Edition: current; Page: [1012] that they do not
perform two-thirds of the amount of work which they are capable of;
hence the continual fretting of masters, who, seeing their interests
neglected, believe themselves entitled to suppose that workmen are
constantly conspiring to ruin those from whom they derive their
livelihood. If the journeyman were sure of constant employment, his
position would in some respects be more enviable than that of the
master, because he is assured of a certain amount of day’s wages, which
he will get whether he works much or little. He runs no risk, and has no
other motive to stimulate him to do his best than his own sense of duty.
The master, on the other hand, depends greatly on chance for his
returns: his position is one of continual irritation and anxiety. This
would no longer be the case to the same extent, if the interests of the
master and those of the workmen were bound up with each other, connected
by some bond of mutual security, such as that which would be obtained by
the plan of a yearly division of profits.”

eEven in the first year during which M. Leclaire’s experiment was in
complete operation, the success wase remarkable. Not one of his
journeymen who worked as many as three hundred days, earned in that year
less than 1500 francs, and some considerably more. His highest rate of
daily wages being four francs, or 1200 francs for 300 days, the
remaining 300 francs or 12l. must have been the smallest amount which
any journeyman, who worked that number of days, obtained as his
proportion of the surplus profit. M. Leclaire describes in strong terms
the improvement which was already manifest in the habits and demeanour
of his workmen, not merely when at work, and in their relations with
their employer, but at other times and in other relations, showing
increased respect both for others and for themselves.]11 fThe system is
still in operation; and we learn from [M. Chevalier]12 [that the
increased zeal of the workpeople]13 continues [to be a full compensation
to]14 M. Leclaire[, even in a pecuniary sense, for the share of profit
which he]15 foregoes [in their favour.]*f16

Under this system, as well as under that recommended by Mr. Babbage,
Edition: current; Page: [1013] the labourers are, in reality, taken into
partnership with their employer. Bringing nothing into the common
concern but their labour, while he brings not only his labour of
direction and superintendence but his capital also, they have justly a
smaller share of the profits; this, however, is a matter of private
arrangement in all partnerships: one partner has a large, another a
small share, according to their agreement, grounded on the equivalent
which is given by each. The essence, however, of a partnership is
obtained, since each benefits by all things that are beneficial to the
concern, and loses by all which are injurious. It is, in the fullest
sense, the common concern of all.

§ 6. [Probable future developement of this principle] To this principle,
in whatever form embodied, it seems to me that futurity has to look for
obtaining the benefits of co-operation, without constituting the
numerical majority of the co-operators an inferior caste. The objections
that apply to a “co-operative society,” in the Communist or Owenite
sense, in which, by force of giving to every member of the body a share
in the common interest, no one has a greater share in it than another,
are not applicable to what is now suggested. It is expedient that those,
whose performance of the part assigned to them is the most essential to
the common end, should have a greater amount of personal interest in the
issue of the enterprise. If those who supply the funds, and incur the
whole risk of the undertaking, obtained no greater reward or more
influential voice than the rest, few would practise the abstinence
through which those funds are acquired and kept in existence. Up to a
certain point, however, the principle of giving to every person
concerned an interest in the profits is an actual benefit to the
capitalist, not only (as M. Leclaire has testified) in point of ease and
comfort, but even in pecuniary advantage. And after the point of
greatest benefit to the employers has been attained, the participation
of the labourers may be carried somewhat further without any material
abatement from that maximum of benefit. At what point, in each
employment of capital, this ultimatum is to be found, will one day be
known and understood from experience; and up to that point it is not
unreasonable to expect that the partnership principle will be, at no
very distant time, extended.

The value of this “organization of industry,” for healing the widening
and embittering feud between the class of labourers and the class of
capitalists, must, I think, impress itself by degrees on all who
habitually reflect on the condition and tendencies of modern society. I
cannot conceive how any such person can persuade himself that the
majority of the community will for ever, or even for much longer,
consent to hew wood and draw water all their lives in the service and
for the benefit of others; Edition: current; Page: [1014] or can doubt,
that they will be less and less willing to co-operate as subordinate
agents in any work, when they have no interest in the result, and that
it will be more and more difficult to obtain the best work-people, or
the best services of any work-people, except on conditions similar in
principle to those of M. Leclaire. Although, therefore, arrangements of
this sort are now in their infancy, their multiplication and growth,
when once they enter into the general domain of popular discussion, are
among the things which may most confidently be expected.

Edition: current; Page: [1015]


1. Associations between the labourers and the employer.

[“En Mars 1847, M. Paul Dupont, gérant d’une imprimerie de Paris, eut
l’idée d’associer ses ouvriers en leur promettant le dixième des
bénéfices. Il en emploie habituellement trois cents, dont deux cents
travaillent aux pièces et cent à la journée. Il emploie, en outre, cent
auxiliaires, qui ne font pas partie de l’association.

“La part de bénéfice avenant aux ouvriers ne leur vaut guère, en
moyenne, qu’une quinzaine de jours de travail; mais ils reçoivent leur
salaire ordinaire suivant le tarif établi dans toutes les grandes
imprimeries de Paris; et, de plus, ils ont l’avantage d’être soignés
dans leurs maladies aux frais Edition: current; Page: [1016] de la
communauté, et de recevoir 1 fr. 50 cent. de salaire par jour
d’incapacité de travail. Les ouvriers ne peuvent retirer leur part dans
les bénéfices que quand ils sortent de l’association. Chaque année,
cette part, qui est représentée tant en matériel qu’en rentes sur
l’Etat, s’augmente par la capitalisation des intérêts, et crée ainsi une
réserve à l’ouvrier.

“M. Dupont et les capitalistes, ses commanditaires, trouvent dans cette
association un profit bien supérieur à celui qu’ils auraient; les
ouvriers, de leur côté, se félicitent chaque jour de l’heureuse idée de
leur patron. Plusieurs d’entre eux, encouragés à la réussite de
l’établissement, lui ont fait obtenir une médaille d’or en 1849, une
médaille d’honneur à l’Exposition Universelle de 1855; et quelques-uns
même ont reçu personellement la récompense de leurs découvertes et de
leurs travaux. Chez un patron ordinaire, ces braves gens n’auraient pas
eu le loisir de poursuivre leurs inventions, à moins que d’en laisser
tout l’honneur à celui qui n’en était pas l’auteur; tandis qu’étant
associés, si le patron eût été injuste, deux cents hommes eussent fait
redresser ses torts.

“J’ai visité moi-même cet établissement, et j’ai pu m’assurer du
perfectionnement que cette association apporte aux habitudes des
ouvriers.

“M. Gisquet, ancien préfet de police, est propriétaire depuis long-temps
d’une fabrique d’huile à Saint-Denis, qui est la plus importante de
France, après celle de M. Darblay, de Corbeil. Lorsqu’en 1848 il prit le
parti de la diriger lui-même, il rencontra des ouvriers habitués à
s’enivrer plusieurs fois par semaine, et qui, pendant le travail,
chantaient, fumaient, et quelquefois se disputaient. On avait maintes
fois essayé sans succès de changer cet état de choses; il y parvint par
la prohibition faite à tous ses ouvriers de s’enivrer les jours de
travail, sous peine d’exclusion, et par la promesse de partager entre
eux, à titre de gratification annuelle, 5 p. 100 de ses bénéfices nets,
au pro rata des salaires, qui, du reste, sont fixés aux prix courants.
Depuis ce moment, la réforme a été complète; il se voit entouré d’une
centaine d’ouvriers pleins de zèle et de dévouement. Leur bien-être
s’est accru de tout ce qu’ils ne dépensent pas en boissons, et de ce
qu’ils gagnent par leur exactitude au travail. La gratification que M.
Gisquet leur accorde, leur a valu, en moyenne, chaque année,
l’équivalent de leur salaire pendant six semaines.]3

“L’un des patrons qui comprirent le mieux l’association avec les
ouvriers est M. Leclaire, entrepreneur de peinture en bâtiments, à
Paris. Dès 1842, sur les conseils de quelques économistes, il associa
ses deux cents ouvriers, en leur promettant la moitié du bénéfice net
outre leur salaire, qui était toujours au moins égal au taux courant.
Une amélioration extraordinaire Edition: current; Page: [1017] se
manifesta tout à coup dans les habitudes de ses ouvriers, qui devinrent
des modèles d’exactitude et de probité. M. Leclaire introduisit l’usage
du blanc de zinc au lieu du blanc de céruse, qui était souvent mortel
pour les ouvriers. Les immenses travaux que lui nécessita cette heureuse
innovation l’ont tellement fatigué, qu’il se vit forcé de s’adjoindre
deux associés en titre, qu’il choisit parmi ses anciens ouvriers; et
depuis 1853, la part du bénéfice partagée entre les ouvriers n’est plus
que du quart, ce dont ceux-ci sont encore satisfaits. Quant à M.
Leclaire, quoiqu’il [ait toujours banni la fraude, qui n’est que trop
fréquente dans sa profession, il a toujours pu soutenir la concurrence
et acquérir une belle aisance, malgré l’abandon d’une si large part de
ses profits. Assurément, il n’y est parvenu que parce que l’activité
inusitée de ses ouvriers, et la surveillance qu’ils exerçaient les uns
sur les autres dans les nombreux chantiers, avaient compensé la
diminution de ses profits personnels.”]4

[“M. Beslay, ancien député de 1830 à 1839, et représentant du peuple à
l’Assemblée constituante, a fondé un atelier important de machines à
vapeur à Paris, dans le faubourg du Temple. Il eut l’idée d’associer
dans ce dernier établissement ses ouvriers, dès le commencement de 1847.
Je transcris ici cet acte d’association, que l’on peut regarder comme
l’un des plus complets de tous ceux faits entre patrons et ouvriers.”]5

2. Associations of labourers among themselves.

“Dès 1851, il existait à Paris environ cent cinquante associations
d’ouvriers qui avaient réussi, la plupart même sans aucun secours. Les
événements politiques de la fin de cette année, et les rivalités de
patrons jaloux, en firent dissoudre le plus grand nombre. L’on n’en
compte plus en 1857 que vingt-trois à Paris, qui, presque toutes,
prospèrent. Je vais brièvement examiner la situation de quelques-unes.

[“Après les journées de juin 1848, le travail était suspendu dans le
faubourg Saint-Antoine, occupé surtout, comme on le sait, par les
fabricants de meubles. Quelques menuisiers en fauteuils firent un appel
à ceux qui seraient disposés à travailler ensemble. Sur six à sept cents
de cette profession, quatre cents se firent inscrire. Mais comme le
capital manquait, neuf hommes des plus zélés commencèrent l’association
avec tout ce qu’ils possédaient; savoir, une valeur de 369 francs en
outils, et 135 francs 20 centimes en argent.

“Leur bon goût, leur loyauté et l’exactitude de leurs fournitures
augmentant leurs débouchés, les associés furent bientôt au nombre de
cent huit. Edition: current; Page: [1018] Ils reçurent de l’Etat une
avance de 25 mille francs, remboursables en quatorze ans par annuité, à
raison de 3 fr. 75 c. pour cent d’intérêt.

“En 1857, le nombre des associés est de soixante-cinq, celui des
auxiliaires de cent en moyenne. Tous les associés votent pour l’election
d’un conseil d’administration de huit membres, et d’un gérant, dont le
nom représente la raison sociale. La distribution et la surveillance du
travail dans les ateliers sont confiées à des contremaîtres choisis par
le gérant et le conseil. Il y a un contre-maître pour vingt ou
vingt-cinq hommes.

“Le travail est payé aux pièces, suivant les tarifs arrêtés en assemblée
générale. Le salaire peut varier entre 3 et 7 francs par jour, selon le
zèle et l’habileté de l’ouvrier. La moyenne est de 50 francs par
quinzaine. Ceux qui gagnent le moins touchent près de 40 francs par
quinzaine. Un grand nombre gagnent 80 francs. Des sculpteurs et
mouluriers gagnent jusqu’à 100 francs, soit 200 francs par mois. Chacun
s’engage à fournir cent-vingt heures par quinzaine, soit dix heures par
jour. Aux termes du réglement chaque heure de déficit soumet le
délinquant à une amende de 10 centimes par heure en-deça de trente
heures, et de 15 centimes au-delà. Cette disposition avait pour objet
d’abolir l’habitude du lundi, et elle a produit son effet. Depuis deux
ans, le système des amendes est tombé en désuetude, à cause de la bonne
conduite des associés.

“Quoique l’apport des associés n’ait été que de 369 francs, le matériel
d’exploitation appartenant à l’établissement* s’élevait déjà, en 1851, à
5713 francs, et l’avoir social, y compris les créances, à 24,000 francs.
Depuis lors cette association est devenue plus florissante, ayant
resisté à tous les obstacles qui lui ont été suscités. Cette maison est
la plus forte de Paris dans son genre, et la plus considérée. Elle fait
des affaires pour 400 mille francs par an. Voici son inventaire de
décembre 1855.

_Actif_
Espèces
445
70
Marchandises
82,930
70
fait d’avance, ce qui empêche le chômage.
Salaires payés d’avance
2421
70
Matériel
20,891
35
Portefeuille
9711
75
Meubles consignés
211
75
Loyer d’avance
4933
10
Débiteurs divers
48,286
95
169,831
55

Edition: current; Page: [1019]
_Passif_
Effets à payer
8655
Fonds d’association
133
100 fr. à chacun
7600
ne la doivent qu’à eux-mêmes.
Fonds de retenue indivisible
9205
84
pour l’Etat, qui prend 10 p. 100 par an sur les bénéfices, le tout
payable au bout de 14 ans.
Caisse de secours
1544
30
ne la doivent qu’à eux-mêmes.
Prêt de l’Etat, principal et intérêt
27,053
30
Créanciers divers
12,559
51
66,752
65

_Différence active_
100,398
90.
La société possède en réalité 123,000 fr.]6

[“L’association des maçons fut fondée le 10 août 1848. Elle a son siége
rue Saint-Victor, 155. Le nombre de ses membres est de 85, et celui de
ses auxiliaires de trois à quatre cents. Elle a deux gérants à sa tête;
l’un, chargé spécialement des constructions; l’autre, de
l’administration. Les deux gérants passent pour les plus habiles
entrepreneurs de maçonnerie de Paris, et ils se contentent d’un modeste
traitement. Cette association vient de construire trois ou quatre des
plus remarquables hôtels de la capitale. Bien qu’elle travaille avec
plus d’économie que les entrepreneurs ordinaires, comme on ne la
rembourse qu’à des termes éloignés, c’est surtout pour elle qu’une
banque serait nécessaire, car elle a des avances considérables à faire.
Néanmoins elle prospère, et la preuve en est dans le dividende de 56
pour 100 qu’a produit cette année son propre capital, et qu’elle a payé
aux citoyens qui se sont associés à ses opérations.

“Cette association est formée d’ouvriers qui n’apportent que leur
travail; d’autres qui apportent leur travail et un capital quelconque;
enfin de citoyens qui ne travaillent point, mais qui se sont associés en
fournissant un capital.”

“Les maçons se livrent le soir à un enseignement mutuel. Chez eux, comme
chez les fabricants de fauteuils, le malade est soigné aux frais de la
société, et reçoit en outre un salaire durant sa maladie. Chacun est
protégé par l’association dans tous les actes de sa vie. Les fabricants
de fauteuils auront bientôt chacun un capital de deux ou trois mille
francs à leur disposition, soit pour doter leurs filles, soit pour
commencer une Edition: current; Page: [1020] réserve pour l’avenir.
Quant aux maçons, quelques-uns possèdent déjà 4000 francs d’épargnes qui
restent au fonds social.

“Avant qu’ils fussent associés, ces ouvriers étaient pauvrement vêtus de
la veste et de la blouse; parce que, faute de prévoyance, et surtout à
cause du chômage, ils n’avaient jamais une somme disponible de 60 francs
pour acheter une redingote. Aujourd’hui, la plupart sont vêtus aussi
bien que les bourgeois; quelquefois même avec plus de goût. Cela tient à
ce que l’ouvrier, ayant un crédit dans son association, trouve partout
ce dont il a besoin sur un bon qu’il souscrit; et la caisse retient
chaque quinzaine une partie de la somme à éteindre. De la sorte,
l’épargne se fait, pour ainsi dire, malgré l’ouvrier. Plusieurs même,
n’ayant plus de dettes, se souscrivent à eux-mêmes des bons de 100
francs payables en cinq mois, afin de résister à la tentation des
dépenses inutiles. On leur retient 10 francs par quinzaine; et au bout
des cinq mois, bon gré, mal gré, ils trouvent ce petit capital
épargné.”]7

[“J’ai pu me convaincre par moi-même de l’habileté]8 du choix [des
gérants et des conseils d’administration des associations ouvrières. Ces
gérants sont bien supérieurs pour l’intelligence, le zèle, et même pour
la politesse, à la plupart des patrons ou entrepreneurs particuliers. Et
chez les ouvriers associés, les funestes habitudes d’intempérance
disparaissent peu à peu, avec la grossièreté et la rudesse qui sont la
conséquence de la trop incomplète éducation de leur classe.”]9

Edition: current; Page: [1021]


Appendix F


The MS of the Principles

the only known ms of the Principles is that in the Pierpont Morgan
Library, New York.* It is the press-copy MS of Vol. I of the 1st
edition, bound in three volumes, half-green morocco, the MS volumes
containing, respectively, Book I; Book II; and Chapters i-vi of Book
III, with the Appendix to Vol. I. The folios of MS Vols. I and II are
watermarked 1846; those of Vol. III are watermarked 1829 and 1833, but
were undoubtedly prepared at the same time as those of the other
volumes. The binding paper, however, is watermarked 1878 (five years
after Mill’s death), and the original folios may not have been cut to
their present size (circa 24c. × 18.5c.) until that time.

The text is written on recto, with the verso sheets reserved for notes
and revisions. (This is one of the two methods usually employed by Mill,
the other being to write on the right-hand side of both recto and verso,
reserving the left-hand side for notes and revisions.) The sheets are
gathered usually into groups of twenty which are lettered sequentially
in Mill’s hand from A to Bb (L, which would occur on the first folio of
Vol. II, does not appear, as the folio is missing). The first volume is
numbered 1-66, 66x, 67-187, and 1-40. Neither the Table of Contents nor
the Preface is here, and the “Preliminary Remarks” of the printed
editions appear as Chapter i, so the chapter numbers differ. The second
volume is numbered 2-139, 1-60, and 1-58, the first folio, as noted
above, being missing; also ff135 and 136 have been misbound between
ff129 and 130. The third volume is numbered 1-60, and 1-16, the last
16ff being the Appendix to Vol. I of the printed text, consisting here
of pasted-up columns from the Morning Chronicle, linked and altered in
ink by Mill. Printers’ marks and signatures are found throughout.

As indicated in the Textual Introduction, the MS is heavily revised,
almost every folio containing cancellations and interlineations. Most of
Edition: current; Page: [1022] the cancellations are trivial (many are
false starts); many are virtually indecipherable. In the following
illustrative examples the early readings are sometimes tentative.

The longest revision evidently took place in Book I, Chapter ix, §2 (on
joint-stock management), which appears in the MS on slightly smaller
sheets in a different pen. The earlier version must have been rejected
in full, as the beginning of this first version of §2 is cancelled on
the last full-sized folio, and the beginning of §3 is found on the last
of the smaller folios, where the last line does not reach the margin.
(These folios are watermarked like those in MS Vol. III.)

Trivial changes are very frequent; I.97.35, “considerable”, will serve
as example. The final MS reading is “material”, but Mill wrote and then
cancelled “great” and “large”, interlined and cancelled “considerable”,
and finally interlined “material”. There are other places where Mill
restored cancelled readings (evidently) in proof; for example at
I.135.31, where the cancelled “advantages” replaces the MS
“recommendations” in the printed version. In a few places proof
corrections were necessary to clear up tangles created by the MS
revisions. For example at I.187.34-5, in altering by cancellation and
interlineation “the improvements which in the arts of production” to
“the improvements which facilitate production”, Mill forgot to cancel
“of” in the MS, but it was caught in proof. A similar change which was
not caught in proof, and so is recorded as a variant,] may be seen at
I.188i-i, where Mill cancelled “properties of the soil” and interlined
“niggardliness of nature” without altering the verb “are” to the
singular. A printer’s error which led to a revision is seen at I.110k-k,
where Mill wrote “the direst waste of wealth”, which the typesetter read
as “the direct waste of wealth”; in looking over the passage in 1852
(and probably puzzling over his apparent choice of words), Mill must
have seen “direct” used again six lines lower in the next sentence, and
so changed the reading to the final “the most obvious part of the waste
of wealth”.

One typical example of the extent of revision will illustrate Mill’s
habits. At I.67, a paragraph ends: “I conceive this to be one of the
many errors arising in political economy, from the practice of not
beginning with the examination of simple cases, but rushing at once into
the complexity of concrete phenomena.” The earliest MS version read,
after “rushing”, “at once into the complication of concrete phenomena,
without having obtained a clue to disentangle them, & hence seeing only
a part of the facts which are relevant to the point in consideration.” A
first revision altered “point in consideration” to “matter”; a second
resulted in the reading, “into the complexity of concrete phenomena,
without first obtaining a clue to disentangle it”; and the final reading
was reached in proof. (Such passages were often altered again in later
editions.)

Edition: current; Page: [1023]
The most interesting cancellations are, of course, the longer ones. In
the 1st edition is found the following passage (an interesting
anticipation of On Liberty), which was altered in the 3rd edition:

The perfection of social arrangements would be to secure to all persons
complete independence and freedom of action, subject to no restriction
but that of not doing injury to others: but the scheme which we are
considering abrogates this freedom entirely, and places every action of
every member of the community under command.

[See I.978.13-18.]

In the MS (II.f9v) that sentence is added to replace the following
cancelled one:

Deprive human life of all which this system would take away from it, &
it would be reduced as I said before, to a sort of sentient vegetation;
a state not so much superior as may be thought, to the condition of any
of the other gregarious animals when they have enough to eat. [In these
two passages I ignore internal revisions.]

An example of a cancelled passage not replaced will seem, to those who
know Mill’s habits, even more typical. At I.368.20, between the
sentences ending with “discussed” and beginning with “People,” the
following sentences were cancelled in the MS:

The maladies of society are like the physical ailments of the wealthy
Turk, whom the Swedish traveller Hasselquist was asked to prescribe for
at Smyrna. The patient was dying of marasmus, & Hasselquist learning
that he had a numerous harem, well knew what advice he needed, but
forbore to give it, & prescribed some trifling palliative, knowing that
any allusion to such a subject, besides being entirely useless, would be
regarded as a mortal affront.

[MS II.ii.51-2.]

A longer example, tentatively reproducing all the stages of revision
(ignoring only a few false starts), shows Mill in difficulty over one of
his key notions, the distinction between Production and Distribution.
Towards the end of his “Preliminary Remarks,” he first wrote the
following sentences:

But though governments or nations can in some measure determine what
institutions shall be established, it is not in their power to make
those institutions have any other effects, than those which naturally
belong to them. What are the effects of human institutions is as much a
question of necessary laws & of strict science, as what are the effects
of natural agencies. The laws, therefore, of the Distribution of Wealth,
are as susceptible of scientific treatment as those of its production:
the latter however are universal, & belong to all states of society
equally, while the former are in a great measure different, according to
the artificial circumstances of different societies; to ascertain the
relation between these artificial circumstances & the differences in the
distribution of wealth which are consequent on it, is the very
scientific object which Political Economy, in this branch of it,
proposes to itself. If mankind will produce wealth, they can do so
according to invariable laws: the manner in which Edition: current;
Page: [1024] they will distribute it, is partly, & would on the
supposition of perfect wisdom be wholly, in their own power to
determine: but the necessary conditions of the power they can exercise
over the distribution, & the manner in which it is affected by the
various modes of conduct which society may think fit to adopt, are
determined by laws as rigid, & as independent of human control, as the
laws of Production itself.

[MS Vol. I.27r, 28r.]

The words “in their power” were altered to “in the power of either”, and
then altered again to produce, with other revisions, the reading:

But though governments or nations can in some measure determine what
institutions shall be established, they cannot arbitrarily determine how
those institutions shall work; their operation when established is a
question of necessary laws & strict science & quite as susceptible of
scientific treatment as are the operation of natural agencies. Though
[illegible word] difference is [illegible word], the laws of Production
are universal, & belong equally to all states of society, while those of
Distribution are in a great measure different, according to the
artificial circumstances of different societies. Mankind can produce
wealth only by conforming to the natural laws of its production; the
manner in which they will distribute it, is partly, & would on the
supposition of perfect knowledge be wholly, in their own power to
determine, but the conditions of the power which they can exercise over
the distribution, & the manner in which it is affected by the various
modes of conduct which society may think fit to adopt, are determined by
laws as rigid, & as independent of human control, as those of Production
itself.

Immediately after this revision, Mill carried the beginning of the
sentence starting “Mankind can” over to the verso of f26, writing:

Mankind can produce wealth, only by conforming to the natural laws of
its production, while the manner in which they will distribute it,

Then, apparently going through the passage yet again, he cancelled all
between “strict science” and “to the laws of Production”, and then
decided to cancel the middle part of the account totally by drawing
vertical lines through it; he then rewrote the final sentence, producing
the last MS version, which is reproduced in the 1st edition with only
one change (“, & as independent of human control,” being omitted from
the last clause). Here is the 1848 version, with subsequent changes
indicated in square brackets:

But though governments or nations can in some measure determine [3rd to
7th eds. nations have the power of deciding] what institutions shall be
established [3rd to 7th eds. shall exist], they cannot arbitrarily
determine how those institutions shall work. The conditions on which the
power they possess over the distribution of wealth is dependent, and the
manner in which the distribution is affected [5th to 7th eds. effected]
by the various modes of conduct which society may think fit to adopt,
are determined by laws as rigid as those of Production itself [3rd to
7th eds. are as much a subject for scientific enquiry as any of the
physical laws of nature].

[See I.21.18-25.]

Edition: current; Page: [a] Edition: current; Page: [b]
[lf0223-03_figure_001.jpg]
The beginning of Book I, Chapter iv, from the MS in the Pierpont Morgan
Library

Edition: current; Page: [1025]
One final example will show the difficulty of reconstructing the heavily
revised passages. The passage below, which is reproduced on the opposite
page, is an attempt at reconstruction: the final reading is given in
bold-face; the first two readings are given in italic, with square
brackets to indicate the cancellations which led (with the italic
interlineation) to the second reading; further revisions are given in
ordinary roman type. (It should be realized that none of the readings
but the last may have existed in complete form.)

But this seems to me a ~~decided~~ misunderstanding ~~is intended to any
of~~ of the matter in dispute. ~~no [one intends any] disparagement [to]
these classes of words, if not of things.~~ Production not being ~~is
not~~ the sole end of human existence, & the term ~~of persons by
refusing to their labour the name of productive, nor are~~ unproductive,
~~therefore,~~ does not necessarily imply any stigma; nor ~~It is not
in~~ was never ~~their respective functions in the economy of society at
all in question~~ intended to do so in the present case. The question is
one of mere language & classification. ~~here.~~ [I.45.20–4; MS I.56]

The assumption is that the first reading was:

But no one intends any disparagement to these classes of persons by
refusing to their labour the name of productive, nor are their
respective functions in the economy of society at all in question here.

The second reading was:

But no disparagement is intended to any of these classes of persons by
refusing to their labour the name of productive, nor are their
respective functions in the economy of society at all in question here.

The third reading was:

But this seems to me a decided misunderstanding of words, if not of
things. Production is not the sole end of human existence & the term
unproductive, therefore, does not necessarily imply any stigma. It was
never intended to do so in the present case. The question is one of mere
language & classification.

(Here a false start in the penultimate sentence is ignored: Mill wrote
“It is not in” and then cancelled “is not in”.) Finally he reached the
ultimate MS reading:

But this seems to me a misunderstanding of the matter in dispute.
Production not being the sole end of human existence, the term
unproductive does not necessarily imply any stigma; nor was ever
intended to do so in the present case. The question is one of mere
language & classification.

The complexity and uncertainty of this reconstruction should illustrate
the inutility of any attempt to reproduce in full the MS cancellations.

Edition: current; Page: [1026]


Appendix G


John Stuart Mill—Harriet Taylor Mill Correspondence

in view of John Stuart Mill’s account of Harriet Taylor’s part in the
writing of the Principles,1 his dedication of the work to her,2 and his
description of it as a “joint production” with her,3 it seems useful to
include here those passages in their correspondence which refer
specifically to the Principles.4 Unfortunately, Harriet Taylor’s side of
the correspondence is lost, except for isolated items not here germane,
and only part of John Stuart Mill’s survives. The passages printed below
include all references in these letters to revisions for the 2nd and 4th
editions. There is no record of the specific part she played in the
writing of the first draft, in the revision for the press copy, or for
the 3rd edition.5 (The revisions for the 5th, 6th, and 7th were made, of
course, after her death.) This is not the place to consider in detail
John Stuart Mill’s account of her role as co-author of the Principles,
but it might be pointed out that the Edition: current; Page: [1027]
evidence given below concerns the revision of two important chapters
(II, i and IV, vii), both of which were subject to major revisions again
after the editions to which this evidence applies.

The letters quoted are all in the Sterling Library at Yale, except that
quoted at II.1032n, which is in the Huntington Library. The numbers at
the upper left of each letter are those used by the correspondents to
indicate the sequence. The letters have no salutations; the dates have
been regularized in form; a series of seven dots has been used to
indicate omitted passages not dealing with the revisions. Superscript
letters (for example, in “2d,” “Messrs,” etc.) have been lowered.

The 1st edition having sold quickly, Mill was urged into revision at the
beginning of 1849, when Harriet (to be widowed in July) was at Pau.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

19 Feb., 1849

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

15
19 Feb., 1849

I received your dear letter 11 on Saturday & this morning the first
instalment of the Pol. Ec. This last I will send again (or as much of it
as is necessary) when I have been able to make up my mind about it. The
objections are I think very inconsiderable as to quantity—much less than
I expected—but that paragraph, p. 248,6 in the first edit. which you
object to so strongly & totally, is what has always seemed to me the
strongest part of the argument (it is only what even Proudhon says
against Communism)—& as omitting it after it has once been printed would
imply a change of opinion, it is necessary to see whether the opinion
has changed or not—yours has, in some respects at least, for you have
marked strong dissent from the passage that “the necessaries of life
when secure for the whole of life are scarcely more a subject of
consciousness”7 &c. which was inserted on your proposition & very nearly
in your words. This is probably only the progress we have been always
making, & by thinking sufficiently I should probably come to think the
same—as is almost always the case, I believe always when we think long
enough. But here the being unable to discuss verbally stands sadly in
the way, & I am now almost convinced that as you said at first, we
cannot settle this 2d edit. by letter. We will try, but I now feel
almost certain that we must adjourn the publication of the 2d edit. to
November. In the new matter one of the sentences that you have cancelled
is a favorite of mine, viz “It is probable that this will finally depend
upon considerations not to be measured by the coarse standard which in
the present state of human improvement is the only one that can be
applied to it.”8 What I meant was that whether individual Edition:
current; Page: [1028] agency or Socialism would be best ultimately—(both
being necessarily very imperfect now, & both susceptible of immense
improvement) will depend on the comparative attractions they will hold
out to human beings with all their capacities, both individual & social,
infinitely more developed than at present. I do not think it is English
improvement only that is too backward to enable this point to be
ascertained for if English character is starved in its social part I
think Continental is as much or even more so in its individual, &
Continental people incapable of entering into the feelings which make
very close contact with crowds of other people both disagreeable &
mentally & morally lowering. I cannot help thinking that something like
what I meant by the sentence, ought to be said though I can imagine good
reasons for your disliking the way in which it is put. Then again if the
sentence “the majority would not exert themselves for anything beyond
this & unless they did nobody else would &c”9 is not tenable, then all
the two or three pages of argument which precede & of which this is but
the summary, are false, & there is nothing to be said against Communism
at all—one would only have to turn round & advocate it—which if done
would be better in a separate treatise & would be a great objection to
publishing a 2d edit. until after such a treatise. I think I agree in
all the other remarks. Fourrier10 if I may judge by Considerant is
perfectly right about women both as to equality & marriage—& I suspect
that Fourier himself went farther than his disciple thinks prudent in
the directness of his recommendations. Considerant sometimes avails
himself as Mr Fox used, of the sentimentalities & superstitions about
purity, though asserting along with it all the right principles. But C.
says that the Fourrierists are the only Socialists who are not orthodox
about marriage—he forgets the Owenites, but I fear it is true of all the
known Communist leaders in France—he says it specially of Buchez, Cabet,
& what surprises one in Sand’s “guide, philosopher & friend” of Leroux.
This strengthens one exceedingly in one’s wish to prôner the
Fourrierists besides that their scheme of association seems to me much
nearer to being practicable at present than Communism.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

21 Feb., 1849

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

16
21 Feb., 1849

I despatched yesterday to the dear one an attempt at a revision of the
objectionable passages.11 I saw on consideration that the objection to
Communism on the ground of its making life a kind of dead level might
admit of being weakened, (though I think it never could be taken away)
consistently with the principle of Communism, though the Communistic
plans now before the public could not do it. The statement of objections
was moreover too vague & general. I have made it more explicit as well
as more moderate; you will judge whether it is now sufficiently either
one or the other; & altogether Edition: current; Page: [1029] whether
any objection can be maintained to Communism, except the amount of
objection which, in the new matter I have introduced, is made to the
present applicability of Fourierism.12 I think there can—& that the
objections as now stated to Communism are valid: but if you do not think
so, I certainly will not print it, even if there were no other reason
than the certainty I feel that I never should long continue of an
opinion different from yours on a subject which you have fully
considered. I am going on revising the book: not altering much, but in
one of the purely political economy parts which occurs near the
beginning, viz. the discussion as to whether buying goods made by labour
gives the same employment to labour as hiring the labourers themselves,
I have added two or three pages of new explanation & illustration which
I think make the case much clearer.13

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

14 March, 1849

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

22
14 March, 1849

What a nuisance it is having anything to do with printers—Though I had
no reason to be particularly pleased with Harrison, I was alarmed at
finding that Parker had gone to another, & accordingly, though the
general type of the first edition is exactly copied, yet a thing so
important as the type of the headings at the top of the page cannot be
got right—you know what difficulty we had before—& now the headings, &
everything else which is in that type, they first gave much too close &
then much too wide, & say they have not got the exact thing, unless they
have the types cast on purpose. Both the things they have produced seem
to me detestable & the worst is that as Parker is sole owner of this
edition I suppose I have no voice in the matter at all except as a point
of courtesy. I shall see Parker today & tell him that I should have much
preferred waiting till another season rather than having either of these
types—but I suppose it is too late now to do any good—& perhaps Parker
dragged out the time in useless delays before, on purpose that all
troublesome changes might be avoided by hurry now. It is as disagreeable
as a thing of the sort can possibly be—because it is necessary that
something should be decided immediately without waiting for the decision
of my only guide & oracle. If the effect should be to make the book an
unpleasant object to the only eyes I wish it to please, how excessively
I shall regret not having put off the edition till next season.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

17 March, 1849

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

23
17(?) March, 1849

The bargain with Parker is a good one & that it is so is entirely your
doing—all the difference between it & the last being wholly your work,
as well as all the best of the book itself so that you have a redoubled
title to your joint ownership of it. While I am on the subject I will
say that the difficulty with Edition: current; Page: [1030] the printer
is surmounted—both he & Parker were disposed to be accommodating & he
was to have the very same type from the very same foundry today—in the
meantime there has been no time lost, as they have been printing very
fast without the headings, & will I have no doubt keep their engagement
as to time. You do not say anything this time about the bit of the
P.E.—I hope you did not send it during the week, as if so it has
miscarried—at the rate they are printing, both volumes at once, they
will soon want it.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

21 March, 1849

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

24 .
21 March, 1849

The Pol. Ec. packet came on Monday for which a thousand thanks. I have
followed to the letter every recommendation. The sentence which you
objected to in toto of course has come quite out.14 In explanation
however of what I meant by it—I was not thinking of any mysterious
change in human nature—but chiefly of this—that the best people now are
necessarily so much cut off from sympathy with the multitudes that I
should think they must have difficulty in judging how they would be
affected by such an immense change in their whole circumstances as would
be caused by having multitudes whom they could sympathize with—or in
knowing how far the social feelings might then supply the place of that
large share of solitariness & individuality which they cannot now
dispense with. I meant one thing more, viz. that as, hereafter, the more
obvious & coarser obstacles & objections to the community system will
have ceased or greatly diminished, those which are less obvious & coarse
will then step forward into an importance & require an attention which
does not now practically belong to them & that we can hardly tell
without trial what the result of that experience will be. I do not say
that you cannot realize & judge of these things—but if you, & perhaps
Shelley & one or two others in a generation can, I am convinced that to
do so requires both great genius & great experience & I think it quite
fair to say to common readers that the present race of mankind (speaking
of them collectively) are not competent to it. I cannot persuade myself
that you do not greatly overrate the ease of making people unselfish.
Granting that in “ten years” the children of a community might by
teaching be made “perfect” it seems to me that to do so there must be
perfect people to teach them. You say “if there were a desire on the
part of the cleverer people to make them perfect it would be easy—but
how to produce that desire in the cleverer people? I must say I think
that if we had absolute power tomorrow, though we could do much to
improve people by good laws, & could even give them a very much better
education than they have ever had yet, still, for effecting in our lives
anything like what we aim at, all our plans would fail from the
impossibility of finding fit instruments. To make people really good for
much it is so necessary not merely to give them good intentions &
conscientiousness but to unseal their eyes—to prevent self flattery,
vanity, irritability & all that family of vices from warping their moral
judgments as those of the very cleverest people are almost always warped
now. But we shall have all these questions out together & they will all
require to be entered into to a certain depth, at least, in the Edition:
current; Page: [1031] new book which I am so glad you look forward to as
I do with so much interest.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

31 March, 1849

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

27
c. 31 March, 1849

The alteration I had made in that sentence of the P.E. was instead of
“placard their intemperance” to say “placard their enormous families”—it
does not read so well, but I think it may do, especially as the previous
sentence contains the words “this sort of incontinence”—but your two
sentences are so very good that as that sheet is not yet printed, get
them in I must & will.15—Are you not amused with Peel about Ireland? He
sneers down the waste lands plan, two years ago, which the timid
ministers, timid because without talent, give up at a single sarcasm
from him, & now he has enfanté a scheme containing that & much more than
was then proposed—& the Times supports him & Ireland praises him. I am
extremely glad he has done it—I can see that it is working as nothing
else has yet worked to break down the superstition about property—& it
is the only thing happening in England which promises a step forward—a
thing which one may well welcome when things are going so badly for the
popular cause in Europe—not that I am discouraged by this—progress of
the right kind seems to me quite safe now that Socialism has become
inextinguishable. I heartily wish Proudhon dead however—there are few
men whose state of mind, taken as a whole, inspires me with so much
aversion, & all his influence seems to me mischievous except as a potent
dissolvent which is good so far, but every single thing which he would
substitute seems to me the worst possible in practice & mostly [?] in
principle. I have been reading another volume of Considerant lately
published16—he has got into the details of Fourierism, with many large
extracts from Fourier himself. It was perhaps necessary to enter into
details in order to make the thing look practicable, but many of the
details are, & all appear, passablement ridicules. As to their system, &
general mode of thought there is a great question at the root of it
which must be settled before one can get a step further. Admitting the
omnipotence of education, is not the very pivot & turning point of that
education a moral sense—a feeling of duty, or conscience, or principle,
or whatever name one gives it—a feeling that one ought to do, & to wish
for, what is for the greatest good of all concerned. Now Fourier, & all
his followers, leave this out entirely, & rely wholly on such an
arrangement of social circumstances17 as without any inculcation of duty
or of “right,” will make every one, by the spontaneous action of the
passions, intensely zealous for all the interests of the whole. Nobody
is ever to be made to do anything but act just as they like, but it is
calculated that they will always, in a phalanstere, like what is best.
This of course leads to the freest Edition: current; Page: [1032]
notions about personal relations of all sorts, but is it, in other
respects, a foundation on which people would be able to live & act
together [?]18 Owen keeps in generals & only says that education can
make everybody perfect, but the Fourierists attempt to shew how, &
exclude, as it seems to me, one of the most indispensable ingredients.

The next references to the Political Economy in the correspondence
between John Stuart Mill and Harriet occur in the series of letters
written early in 1854 when Harriet was at Hyères. As the letters
indicate, Mill was approached by Frederick J. Furnivall, on behalf of
the Christian Socialists, with a request to reprint “On the Probable
Futurity of the Labouring Classes” (IV, vii) as a pamphlet. Mill, with
Harriet’s and his publisher’s approval, acceded to the request, and made
extensive alterations to the chapter. Although he sent the proofs to
Furnivall, no copy of the pamphlet has been located, and there is
considerable doubt as to whether it was printed. In fact, Furnivall
approached him again in 1860 with the same request, to which Mill
replied almost exactly as he had done six years earlier.19

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

4 Feb., 1854

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

16
4 Feb., 1854

While I write, in comes a note from one of the Kingsley set who has
written before, as you probably remember. I send his affected note which
asks leave to Edition: current; Page: [1033] reprint the Chapter on the
Future of the Labouring Classes. Of course I must tell him that he must
ask leave of Parker, but I should perhaps tell him also, & certainly
should be prepared to tell Parker, whether I have any objection myself.
I should think I have not: what does my angel think? I did not expect
the Xtian Socialists would wish to circulate the chapter as it is in the
3d edit. since it stands up for Competition against their one-eyed
attacks & denunciations of it.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13 Feb., 1854

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

19
13 Feb., 1854

I will answer Furnivall as you say. I do not know what alterations the
chapter requires & cannot get at it as the last edition is locked up in
the plant room. I can of course get from Parker another copy, or even
those particular sheets from the “waste”. I imagine that if I tell
Furnivall of making alterations he will be willing to give me time
enough—besides I could send you the chapter by post.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

18 Feb., 1854

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

21
18 Feb., 1854

I wrote to Furnivall in the manner you wished, & have had two notes from
him since—the first short—“I am very much obliged to you for your kind
letter of yesterday, & will communicate forthwith with Messrs Parker &
Son, & then again with you as to the additions to the chapter.” The
other which came this morning “Messrs P. & Son have given me their
consent to your chapter on” &c. “being reprinted. If you will be kind
enough to send me the additions you said you would be so good as to
make, as soon as is convenient to you, I will have the chapter as
revised set up immediately on receipt of them, & send you a proof.” I
wrote a short answer asking for a few days time to consider how I could
improve it, & wrote to Parker for the sheets—they will come I suppose on
Monday & I will send them to my precious guide philosopher & friend by
that day’s post. I have not the least idea at present what additions
they require, but between us we shall I am sure manage to improve them
very much.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

20 Feb., 1854

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

22
20 Feb., 1854

The chapter of the P.E. I shall send by the post which takes this
letter. If the post office tells me right, a penny stamp will cover it &
you will have nothing to pay. I do not know where to begin or where to
stop in attempting to improve it. One would like to write a treatise
instead. As for minor additions I wish I could get some more recent
facts as to the French Associations Edition: current; Page: [1034]
Ouvrières. I must also say something about the English ones (though a
very little will suffice) as Furnivall suggests in another note he has
written to me which I inclose. The note at p. 33120 now requires
modification so far as concerns the first half of it. I shall not
attempt any alterations till I hear from you.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

28 Feb., 1854

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

24
28 Feb., 1854

You have by this time got the chapter—As so much is said of the French
associations I must put in a few words about the English, of which
Furnivall has sent me a long list21—especially as it is going among the
very people—but I shall take care not to commit myself to anything
complimentary to them. F. has also from Nadaud some later intelligence
about the French,22 nearly all of which are put down.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

6 March, 1854

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

26
6 March, 1854

The Pol. Ec. was put into the post 21 Feb. being Tuesday, instead of
Monday, the day I wrote—the reason being that Parker did not send it
till I was just leaving the I.H. at near five oclock, & as I had no
other copy I wished to read it quietly at home before sending it. It
certainly dear was very wrong to send it without making that sentence
illegible,23 for it was wrong to run any risk of that kind—the risk
happily was small, as they were not likely to take the trouble of
looking into letters or packets addressed to unsuspected persons, nor if
they did were they likely to see that sentence, nor if they saw it to
make the receiver answerable for a sentence in a printed paper forming
part of an English book. Still it was a piece of criminal rashness which
might have done mischief though it probably has not. Did it arrive with
a penny stamp, attached half to the cover & half to the blank page, so
as to be a sort of cachet? If it did not, however, it would not prove it
to have been opened, as the stamp might come off. It was another piece
of thoughtlessness not to say that I had no other copy. It is, however,
probable, though not certain, that I could get another from Parker, & I
would have applied to him for one now if you had said that you would not
send yours until you receive this; but as you will probably have sent it
after receiving my next letter, & it is therefore probably on its way, I
will wait to see. I quite agree with you about the inexpediency of
adding anything like practical advice, or anything at all which alters
the character of the chapter—the working men ought to see that it was
not written for them—any attempt to mingle the two characters would be
Edition: current; Page: [1035] sure to be a failure & is not the way in
which we should do the thing even if we had plenty of time & were
together.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9 March, 1854

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

27
9 March, 1854

About the P.E. I shall write immediately to Parker for another copy. I
do not intend to say anything in praise of the English Associations but
solely to state the fact that they are now very numerous &
increasing—perhaps stating how many, according to a list which F. gave
me. Whatever I do write I will send you & it will cause no or but little
delay as the thing can go to press meanwhile & alterations be made when
it is in proof.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

11 March, 1854

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

28
11 March, 1854

I have not yet any answer from Parker to my application for another copy
of the chapter.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

14 March, 1854

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

30
14 March, 1854

I find a good deal of difficulty in adding much to the chapter of the P.
Econ. without altering its character, which must be maintained, in the
main, as it is, as something written of but not to the working classes.
I think I agree in all your remarks & have adopted them almost all—but I
do not see the possibility of bringing in the first two pages (from the
preceding chapter)24—I see no place which they would fit. Not having
your copy, I do not know what sentence you would omit from page 330.25 I
do not see how to bring in anything about short hours bills well; does
it seem necessary to do so here?—& I have not yet succeeded in bringing
in your remark on page 346.26 I have translated (with some omissions)
all the French. I give on the next page all the additions I have made.
If I make any more I will send them. I shall keep it back from Furnivall
for a few days—if he is not urgent, till I hear from you.

Additional note, in brackets, to p. 33127

[Mr Fitzroy’s Act for the better protection of women & children against
assaults, is a well meant though inadequate attempt to remove the first
reproach. Edition: current; Page: [1036] The second is more flagrant
than ever, another Reform Bill having been presented this year, which
largely extends the franchise among many classes of men, but leaves all
women in their existing state of political as well as social servitude.]

Page 332 near the bottom.28 “The rich in their turn are regarded as a
mere prey & pasture for the poor & are the subject of demands &
expectations wholly indefinite, increasing in extent with every
concession made to them. The total absence of regard for justice or
fairness in the relations between the two, is at the least as marked on
the side of the employed as on that of the employers. We look in vain
among the working classes for the just pride which will choose to give
good work for good wages: for the most part their sole endeavour is to
receive as much, & return as little in the shape of service, as
possible.”

Page 346, continuation of note.29 “One of the most discreditable
indications of a low moral condition, given of late by the English
working classes, is the opposition to piece work. Dislike to piecework,
except under mistaken notions, must be dislike to justice & fairness, or
desire to cheat, by not giving work in proportion to the pay. Piecework
is the perfection of contract; & contract, in all work, & in the most
minute detail—the principle of so much pay for so much service carried
to the utmost extremity—is the system, of all others, in the present
state of society, most favorable to the worker, though most unfavourable
to the non-worker who wishes to be paid for being idle.”

Note to p. 347.30 “According to the latest accounts which have reached
us (March 1854) seven of these associations are all which are now left.
But Cooperative stores (associations pour la consommation) have greatly
developed themselves, especially in the S. of France, & are at least not
forbidden (we know not whether discouraged) by the Government.”

Note to p. 348.31 “Though this beneficent movement has been so fatally
checked in the country in which it originated, it is rapidly spreading
in those other countries which have acquired, & still retain, any
political freedom. It forms already an important feature in the social
improvement which is proceeding at a most rapid pace in Piedmont: & in
England on the 15th of Feb. of the present year 1854 there had been
registered under the Indl & Provt Societies Act, 33 associations, 17 of
which are Industrial Societies, the remainder being associations for
cooperative consumption only. This does not include Scotland, where also
these assns are rapidly multiplying. The Societies which have registered
under this new Act are only a portion of the whole. A list dated in June
1852 gives 41 assns for productive industry in E. & Sc. besides a very
much greater number of flour mill societies & cooperative stores.”

Edition: current; Page: [1037]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

18 March, 1854

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

31
18 March, 1854

My letter to Avignon also contained copies of all the new matter of any
importance in the Chapter of the Pol. Ec. & asked what was the sentence
in page 330 that you had marked to come out—but the chapter itself has
arrived since & there is no sentence marked in that page—I suppose the
dear one altered her mind & rubbed out the marks.32 I still hold to
keeping it back from Furnivall till I hear your opinion of the
additional matter which will be in a few days now.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

3 April, 1854

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

34
3 April, 1854

When I got her approval of the alterations in the chapter, I inserted a
saving clause about piece work33 & sent the whole to Furnivall who
promises a proof shortly.

The last references to the Political Economy in the correspondence
between John Stuart Mill and Harriet occur in 1857, when he was revising
for the 4th edition while she was in Glasgow.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

18 Feb., 1857

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

18 Feb., 1857

I get on quickly with the Pol. Econ. as there is but little to add or
alter.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

19 Feb., 1857

Yale

Harriet Taylor Mill

Mill, Harriet Taylor

19 Feb., 1857

I pass the evening always at the Pol. Economy, with now & then a little
playing to rest my eyes & mind. There will be no great quantity to
alter, but now & then a little thing is of importance. One page I keep
for consideration when I can shew it to you. It is about the qualities
of English workpeople, & of the English generally. It is not at all as I
would write it now, but I do not, in reality, know how to write it.34

Edition: current; Page: [1038]


Appendix H


John Stuart Mill—John E. Cairnes Correspondence and Notes

the central and most detailed part of the long and friendly
correspondence between John Stuart Mill and John E. Cairnes concerns the
suggestions which Cairnes made, on Mill’s request, about the revision
for the 6th edition of the Principles. This appendix draws on that
correspondence (both sides of which are in the Mill-Taylor Collection,
London School of Economics),1 and on two sets of notes written by
Cairnes to accompany his letters. The first of these, hereafter called
“Notes on the Principles” (Mill-Taylor Collection) deals with technical
criticisms of isolated passages in the 5th edition; the second,
hereafter called “Notes on Ireland” (National Library of Ireland),
supplies information about land tenure and population in Ireland.

The “Notes on the Principles” were sent in two batches, with Cairnes’
letters of 29 Nov. and 6 Dec., 1864. The “Notes on Ireland” were also
sent in two batches, on 23 and 24 Dec., 1864. The material is arranged
below in chronological order, with the Notes attached at the end of the
relevant letters. It has been necessary to limit quotation from the
letters to passages concerning the revision of the Principles, although
other economic and political matters are discussed at great length in
this very interesting correspondence. All the letters between 3 Oct.,
1864, and 27 March, 1865, are here represented in part, except for
Cairnes’ letters of 17 and 20 March, which contain no reference to
revision. The passage from Cairnes’ letter of 2 June, 1865, is given
merely as a conclusion. As in Appendix G, the form of the dates has been
regularized; a series of seven dots has been used to indicate omitted
passages not dealing with the revisions, and superscripts have been
lowered.

The “Notes on the Principles” are given in full, with editorial notes in
square brackets at the end of each note, indicating the relevant
passages Edition: current; Page: [1039] in the present edition, and
noting (by the words “Altered” and “Unaltered”) whether Mill changed the
passage as a result of Cairnes’ criticism. The following editorial
liberties have been taken: the separate notes are each headed by a
centred number, and the page reference to the present edition is given
at the beginning of each note, followed by Cairnes’ reference to the 5th
edition in parentheses. Cairnes’ numbering of his folios has been
ignored; his square brackets have been altered to round; punctuation has
been supplied where necessary for abbreviations; and superscripts (as in
“wd” and “shd”) have been lowered. Square brackets within the text,
unless otherwise noted, indicate tears in the manuscript or (as there is
no chance of confusion) references to the present edition where Cairnes
has references to the 5th edition. (At two places references to the
present edition replace Cairnes’ references to folios in this
manuscript.) Cairnes’ footnotes are given at the bottom of the page;
occasionally the exact placing of the footnote indicator in the text has
been difficult, because Cairnes places them in the margin against
passages; they are here placed after the most appropriate word. One
curious matter: the manuscript is very delicate, and the British Library
of Political Science and Economics has a photostat copy which actually
contains readings no longer preserved in the manuscript, because of the
latter’s deterioration.

The “Notes on Ireland” have not been reproduced in full; most of them
are summaries of books and articles on Ireland (a list is given at
II.1075n), and what appears below is Cairnes’ final version of his own
opinions and findings, which appears in the collection as a discrete
item. (There is also an earlier version.) The same editorial liberties
have been taken, where appropriate, as in the case of the “Notes on the
Principles,” and footnotes added to indicate the passages incorporated
by Mill into the 6th edition.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

3 Oct., 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

1.


MILL TO CAIRNES

Saint Véran, Avignon

3 Oct., 1864

.

We shall be here till January. I have much work cut out for me to do
during this autumn and winter, part of which is that of correcting my
Political Economy for a new edition. I should be very glad to make any
improvement in it which you can suggest, and especially to know if there
is anything which you think it would be useful to say on the present
state of Ireland. My speculations on the means of improvement there have
been in a state of suspended animation, from which it is almost time
that they should emerge.

Edition: current; Page: [1040]
John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

13 Oct., 1864

Stameen, Drogheda

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2.


CAIRNES TO MILL

Stameen, Drogheda

13 Oct., 1864

.

I assure you I feel very deeply gratified by your wish for suggestions
from me for the forthcoming edition of your Political Economy, with
which I shall be only too happy to comply. In about a month I go down to
Galway to put in a course of lectures there, and I purpose to take that
opportunity to make a careful perusal of your Political Economy. I shall
then make notes of any points that occur to me as at all deserving of
your consideration, and will send them to you. I do not anticipate,
however, that I can make any suggestion of the least importance. There
is one portion of the subject indeed in which I should like to see the
nomenclature considerably recast—that which deals with the causes
affecting the phenomena of the Money Market, including the subjects of
the loan fund, credit &c., but even should you approve of my views on
this point, the gain from the change would form no kind of compensation
for the trouble it would involve. I have a paper on this subject partly
written2 (which I had intended as one of the essays which were to form
that volume of which I spoke to you some time ago) and, as soon as I can
find time to finish it, I should be very glad to submit it to you. I
shall hope to have both it and the notes ready before Xmas. With regard
to Ireland, I think you have exactly hit the true state of the case in
the remark in the last edition of your Pol. Economy in which you say
that the time has passed for heroic remedies.3 Further improvement is I
think to be effected by such measures as Land Law reform, with a view
principally to facilitating the transfer and acquisition of land in
small portions, diffusion of agricultural knowledge, and lastly—a point
to which I attach some importance—the inculcation through the press and
otherwise of sound opinions on the subject of land tenure with a view to
the creation of a public opinion capable of controlling landlords in the
exercise of their legal rights. All such measures, however, appear to me
to be quite as much needed for England as for this country. As for
land-compensation schemes I have no faith in them.

As regards the actual condition of Ireland, I hope to be able in the
course of a month to furnish you with at least the materials for forming
a sound opinion. My friend Judge Longfield, of whom I have just spoken,
is at present preparing an address for the opening of the approaching
Session of our Statistical Society on this subject;4 and I know no one
on whose judgment, from his long and extended acquaintance with the
subject, the soundness of his economic views (he was the first Whately
Professor) and his entire freedom from prejudice, I should for my part
be more disposed to rely. I expect a very valuable address from him, and
you may depend upon me to lose no time in sending you a copy.

Edition: current; Page: [1041]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

8 Nov., 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

3.


MILL TO CAIRNES

Saint Véran, Avignon

8 Nov., 1864

.

Your letter of the 13th October was as your letters always are,
extremely interesting to me. I am very desirous of any suggestions that
may occur to you for the improvement of this edition of my Political
Economy, as it will be the foundation of a cheap popular edition which
will be stereotyped. I have just heard from the publisher that the old
edition is so nearly out, as to require that the new one should be got
on with sooner than I expected when I wrote to you, and I am therefore
obliged to lay aside what I was writing (a paper on Comte for the
Westminster Review)5 to set about the revision. Consequently, the sooner
I can have even a part of your remarks, the better: but what is not
ready for the revision may easily be in time to be made use of in the
proofs.

I expect to learn much respecting the state of Ireland from Judge
Longfield’s address. But I at present feel considerably puzzled what to
recommend for Ireland. It cannot be said any longer that the English
system of landlords, tenant farmers, and hired labourers is impossible
in Ireland, as it was in the days before the famine. But it does not
seem to me to suit the ideas, feelings, or state of civilization of the
Irish. And I cannot see that the changes, great as they are, have
abolished cottierism. They have diminished competition for land, and the
evil of rackrents, and tenants always in arrear. But I do not see that
the tenant has an atom more of motive to improve, or inducement to
industry and frugality than he had. He finds all this in America: if he
could find it at home, he probably would not emigrate.

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

Galway

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

4.


CAIRNES TO MILL

Galway

29 Nov., 1864

.

You will think it strange that you have not heard from me sooner in
reply to your letter of the 8th inst. It reached me at a time when I was
working under much pressure, and, not having any notes in such a state
that I could send them to you, I have deferred writing till I could get
some material ready. I now send you some ten pages of notes set down in
the order which I happened to have them most forward in preparation. You
will see that I have in several instances made bold to criticise you:
for the most part my criticisms do not pass beyond verbal questions; but
even when they go no further than this I offer them with the most
sincere deference: much more do I feel distrust of my conclusions when I
venture to differ from you on Edition: current; Page: [1042] points of
doctrine. I hope to send you another batch of notes in about a week, the
remainder will consist in what I have to say on Ireland & on the theory
of money and interest.6

Ere this reaches you, you will probably have seen Judge Longfield’s
address, and possibly will detect my hand in some articles in the Daily
News,7 setting forth his views. I expect you will be somewhat
disappointed with his address. I certainly do not agree with much of his
argument on the subject of “fixity of tenure,” which I think is pervaded
by the fallacy of transferring what is true from an individual point of
view to a point of view of a general kind. However his suggestions are I
think very valuable. I have just received from him a bundle of M.S.,
from which I hope to extract a good deal of information to send you with
my next despatch.


Notes on the Principles of Political Economy (Fifth Edition)


1

I.58.6-7 (I.71). “This mode of levying taxes, therefore, limits
unnecessarily the industry of the country.” This, I think, is only true
where the Govt keeps in hand larger funds than the requirements of the
public service call for; and where the Govt does this, the observation
holds in whatever way taxation be imposed. [This note cancelled by
Cairnes. Unaltered.]


2

I.65-6 (I.81). To the instances given here of industry falling short of
the development rendered possible by the state of capital might perhaps
be added the case of “unemployed capital” referred to ante p. 70 [I.57].
[Unaltered.]


3

I.70.11 (I.87). “To consume less than is produced, is saving”.—Might it
not be well to add “the balance being employed productively”—with a view
to distinguish “saving” from “hoarding”. Without this distinction two
good terms seem to be thrown away in expressing the same conception. (I
observe in the next paragraph this distinction is maintained.)
[Unaltered. The “next paragraph” is at I.70.17ff.]


4

I.78.32 (I.98). Fourth fundamental theorem:—“Demand for commodities is
not demand for labour.” It seems to me that this is rather a different
mode of stating the third fundamental theorem (p. 87 [I.70.20-3])—“that
the result of saving is consumed, though by persons other than he who
saves”, than a separate and distinct proposition, and that there wd,
with a view to clearness of exposition, be an advantage in connecting
the discussion of this doctrine with that—the third theorem. I say with
a view to clearness; because if the fact be once firmly seized, that
saving, as compared with unproductive spending, involves the
distinction, that in the former case [pro]ductive labourers consume,
while in the latter the consumption is performed by the owner of the
Edition: current; Page: [1043] wealth (and the fact is so simple that it
has only need to be fairly presented to the mind in order to be
apprehended)—I say if this simple distinction be once firmly seized, I
think all that follows with the important consequences which attach to
it cannot but be accepted. In short to establish the doctrine that
“demand for commodities is not demand for labour”—i.e. does not benefit
the labouring classes—all that is needed is the two assumptions 1. that
he who profits by (i.e. enjoys) wealth is he who consumes it, and 2.
that productive labourers consume saved wealth, while wealth
unproductively spent is consumed wholly by the unproductive consumers.

Perhaps the best practical reductio ad absurdum of the opposite doctrine
is afforded by the Poor Law. If it be equally for the benefit of the
poorer classes whether I consume my wealth unproductively or set aside a
portion in the form of wages or alms for their direct consumption, then
on what ground can the policy be justified of taking my money from me to
support paupers? wd not my unproductive expenditure have equally
benefitted them, while I shd have enjoyed it too? If society can both
eat its cake and have its cake, why shd it not be permitted to indulge
in the double luxury? Whately said somewhere8 that the only difference
between giving money in alms and spending it for one’s own pleasure,
was, that in one case you paid a man for doing something, while in the
other you paid him for doing nothing. Now let us test this by a simple
case. I have a sixpence and am in doubt whether to purchase a cake with
it for my own eating or to give it to a beggar. By purchasing the cake,
according to Whately, I pay a man for making a cake; by giving it to the
beggar I pay a man for doing nothing; therefore on the principle of
encouraging industry, I am bound to eat the cake. But suppose the beggar
were to plead that he meant to purchase & consume the very same
sweetmeat? &c &c

[Altered. At I.84r-r Mill adopts, mostly in Cairnes’ words, the material
contained in the paragraph beginning: “Perhaps the best practical. . . .
” The passage above in quotation marks, beginning: “that the result of
saving . . .” is not a direct quotation.]


5

I.8.26-8 (I.9). “Wealth as applied to the possessions of an individual,
and to those of a nation or of mankind”. The distinction might be
carried further—to capital, and even to the subdivisions of capital.
Thus the rent paid by the farmer is a portion of his capital, but it is
not capital to the nation or to mankind. Again Surplus Wages—i.e. wages
in excess of what is necessary “for the strictly indispensable”
requirements of the labourer, is capital to his employer, but not in the
general sense;—in short all the limitations specified at pp. 70-71
[I.57-8] wd be met by this distinction.* Further the same Edition:
current; Page: [1044] distinction may be traced in the subdivisions.
e.g. Money is, regarded from an individual point of view, “circulating
capital”, but it is “fixed capital” in a national sense. (I rather think
Adam Smith has made a remark to this effect).10 It may be regarded as a
machine for effecting the exchanges of the nation. To that portion
however which passes from country to country, and which in times like
the present when gold & silver are increasing is very large the remark
of course does not apply. [Unaltered in specified places.]


6

I.97b-b (I.120). “I doubt if there could be found a single example of a
great increase of fixed capital at a time and place where circulating
capital was not rapidly increasing also.” I think Ireland during the
last four years wd furnish such a case. That her total agricultural
wealth has greatly diminished is proved by the Registrar General’s
returns—Mr Gladstone estimated the loss at £27,000,000—and during the
same time the conver[sion] of tillage into pasture has been rapidly
progressing. The coincidence of the two occurrences has no doubt
powerfully stimulated the emigration. [Altered.]


7

I.99.18-19 (I.122). “Capital as to its destination” which “is not yet
capital in actual exercise”:—Might we not conveniently distinguish the
former as “potential capital”? “Potential capital” in the largest sense
wd include all the capital which the credit of an individual or of a
nation, if forced to the utmost, cd command. [Unaltered.]


8

I.100-15 (I.124-41). Should not the strength of “abstinence”, or (what
is the positive aspect of the same principle) of the “effective desire
of accumulation” have a place among the causes on which “the degrees of
productiveness” depend? [Unaltered.]


9

I.120.1-3 (I.147). “There is no inconsistency between this doctrine and
the proposition we before maintained that a market for commodities does
not constitute employment for labour.” This statement appears
irreconcileable with the admission made in note * to p. 107. [I.87w-w]
where this very case is regarded as “a limitation” of the proposition in
question.* [The] latter seems to me the more correct view, and with this
limitation I think might be combined others. I wd state the doctrine and
its limitations thus:—The general Edition: current; Page: [1045]
principle is, that demand for coms determines merely the direction of
labour and the kind of wealth produced, not the quantity or efficiency
of the labour or the aggregate of wealth. The exceptions are:—

1. Where labour is supported but not fully occupied, an increase of
demand may stimulate the labour thus supported to increased exertions—to
full activity—of which the result may be an increase of wealth; the
producers obtaining a share of this increase. But note—even in the
supposed case this result will only happen when the new demand is based
upon a new creation of commodities directly applicable to human
purposes. An increase of demand based on an increase of money (whether
paper or gold) wd not have this effect:* it wd only issue in a general
rise of prices; the motives to industry being the same as before. An
increase of money might indeed have the effect of stimulating partially
employed labour into increased exertion if money were an object of
desire for its own sake, as in hoarding countries (it would here become
“directly applicable to human purposes”). It is probable that the
increased production of the precious metals of late years may have in
this way contributed to the augmentation of wealth in certain
semi-civilized countries—e.g. India.

2. There is another case in which increase of demand may increase the
aggregate of wealth and benefit the productive classes—namely, where
this increase renders possible an increased development of the principle
of division of labour, and thus a more effective distribution of the
productive forces of society.

Communities having a certain density of population are more favourably
situated for the production of wealth and therefore for the remuneration
of the productive classes than some in which population is extremely
sparse. The benefit obtained in this case is effected through an
increased demand for commodities. Note This is not identical with the
last exception: the advantage in that case was obtained by calling into
greater activity labour which had previously been but partially
employed: in the latter instance the labour may have been all fully
employed, but exerted inefficiently through lack of that market for its
products which was requisite to allow of its due division.

3. A third exception occurs in the case noticed post p. 410 [I.338]—the
case described by the common saying that “wages are high when trade is
good”. It is true that in this case the proximate agency in the benefit
conferred on the labouring classes is the capital applied to the
purchase of their labour, but this capital is called into activity
through the demand for commodities. [Unaltered at I.120, but I.87
altered and moved to text, incorporating Cairnes’ wording; see I.87x-x.
For Cairnes’ second case, see I.87y-y88; the passage indicated in his
third case (I.338) is unaltered.]


10

I.119.17ff. (I.146). If an actual illustration be preferred to a
hypothetical one, one will be found in Vol. IV, pp. 11-12 of Grote’s
History of Greece (new ed.),11 where the historian describes the
stimulating effect on Athenian agriculture of the accession of a large
number of “metics” to the population of Edition: current; Page: [1046]
Athens and its neighbourhood on the occasion of the building the
fortifications of the Piræus after the expulsion of the Persians.
[Unaltered.]


11

I.118-22 (I.145-50). It seems to me that in this passage more is
attributed to “separation of employments” than is fairly due to it. In
the imaginary case of the settlement, a separation of empls is no doubt
coincident with the advantages which arise from the accession of new
settlers; but I cannot see that separation of employments is the cause
of this gain in such a sense as wd justify one in saying that the
separation being effected the result must follow. The true cause, I
should prefer to say, was the increase of population coupled with an
accession of industrial skill and knowledge. Now with a view to the
practical application of the illustration this is an important
distinction; for if we adopt the former view, that the benefit is the
result of separation of emplts, the natural conclusion wd be that, in
order to secure the benefit, we have only to effect the separation. This
was the conclusion which Wakefield drew, and he consistently advocated
measures which had for their object to compel the population of new
settlements into towns, overlooking, or at least regarding as of
subordinate importance, their aggregate increase. But if we adopt the
latter [view] the practical conclusion will be very different.
Recognizing in the advantages gained the effect of increased numbers and
superior industrial skill, we should direct our attention, as the main
business, to rendering by every means the colony attractive, and
attractive especially to persons in possession of industrial skill,
trusting that when the conditions of society occurred in which
separation of employments was profitable, separation wd take place. Thus
in considering the question of a “sufficient price” for colonial land,
we should decide it exclusively with a view to what wd render the colony
attractive to the greatest number of the right sort of people, without
complicating the problem by introducing the consideration of “separation
of employments.” I am fully alive to the immense services which
Wakefield has rendered to the cause of colonization; but his system, as
he himself conceived it, appears to me to commit the mistake of seeking
to accomplish by giving increased complexity to the machinery of
society—multiplying the social valves and cranks—what can only be
accomplished and can be completely and effectually accomplished by
augmenting the motive power. It may be added that, with a view to the
end contemplated by Wakefield, even granting the importance of
separation of employments, there wd be no necessity in the present state
of the world for the local separation of employments which he was
anxious to enforce. The “territorial” separation—foreign trade—wd
furnish the stimulus in an intensified form. This is in truth contained
in the remarks on the best means of promoting the prosperity of India
pp. 149-50. [I.121-2.] [Unaltered.]


12

I.135-7 (I.168-9). Among the advantages which the Joint Stock plan
enjoys over individual management is its incident of publicity. In
banking especially publicity is, I should think, a most important a
[sic] condition towards securing confidence—perhaps as much so as a
large subscribed capital. A heavy loss occurring to a private bank may
be kept secret; even though it were of such magnitude as to occasion the
ruin of the bank, the copartners may nevertheless Edition: current;
Page: [1047] go on for years trying to retrieve its position, only to
fall in the end with a greater crash; but this cannot happen in the case
of a joint stock company whose accounts are published periodically. The
accounts indeed may be, as they often are, cooked; but they do exercise
some check. Hence the public repose greater confidence in joint stock
management in the case of banks. I observe it stated in a financial
article in the D. News that nearly all new accounts are opened with the
joint stock banks. The most striking testimony to the superiority of the
joint stock principle in banking yet furnished has been furnished within
the present year, by the amalgamation of three of the oldest private
banking houses in London—those of Messrs Masterman & Co., of Messrs
Hankey & Co. and Heywood & Kennard & Co., and of Messrs Jones Lloyd &
Co., with joint stock concerns—viz. the first with “the Agra & United
Service Bank”, the two next with “the Consolidated Bank”, and the last
with “the London & Westminster Bank”. See Daily News, 18 April 1864.12
[Altered; see I.136g-g.]


13

I.155.19ff. (I.194). “ephemeral theories of a different law of increase
&c.” I observe the Spectator frequently of late13 bringing forward what
it regards as a “decisive fact” against the practical deduction from the
doctrine of Malthus—namely that even where men defer marriage they
generally choose young wives; and that such marriages—the man say being
40 and the woman 20—are as prolific—indeed I believe the statement is
are more prolific—than where both parties are young: hence the Spectator
argues the deferring of marriage tends to accelerate the rate of human
increase. The insufficiency of the premiss for the conclusion based on
it is obvious enough; but how far are there physiological grounds for
the statement? And wd it be worth while to dispose of the so called
“refutation” in a foot note? [Unaltered.]


14

I.172.12-15 (I.214) as compared with p. 230 [I.186.3]. There seems to be
here a verbal contradiction. In the former passage are the words:—“the
second requisite, increase of capital, shows no tendency to become
deficient. So far as that element is concerned, production is
susceptible of an increase without assignable limits”; while in the
latter “the limit to the increase of production” is stated as “twofold;
from deficiency of capital or of land.” The context in the former
passage shows that, in speaking of capital you there had in view the
mental principle on which the accumulation of capital depends—abstinence
or the effective desire of accumulation; which, as you show, becomes
stronger with the advance of human society; while in the latter passage
the reference is obviously to the material substances which form the
prerequisites of production. The verbal difficulty appears to me to
arise from the imperfect analysis of the agents of production contained
in the formula—“land, capital, and labour”—capital being itself wealth
in its most complex form: to explain the law of its increase is to
explain the law of the increase of wealth; and, were the word throughout
chap. XI employed in the sense in which it had been previously defined,
nothing wd be gained by the analysis towards the Edition: current; Page:
[1048] simplification of the problem; but the word is throughout the
argument I think plainly used as convertible with the principle of the
“effective desire of accumulation.” This is so manifestly the case that
I do not think any intelligent reader cd be led astray: still perhaps it
wd be better—it wd certainly I think be more accurate—to make the
analysis of industrial agents into land, the effective desire of
accumulation, and labour. All verbal confusion wd thus be avoided. What
we want I think is some word which wd express both the purpose and the
self-denial—the desire to accumulate and the sacrifice in the form of
abstinence which the satisfaction of that desire entails. [Unaltered.]


15

I.414.22-5 (I.503). “The cost of labour is a function of three
variables: the efficiency of labour; the wages of labour (meaning
thereby the real reward of the labourer); and the greater or less cost
at which the articles composing that real reward can be produced or
*purchased.”

The analysis here, it seems to me, is incomplete; “the cost of the real
reward of the labourer” involving the very conception—“cost of
labour”—which it is the purpose of the analysis to elucidate. Or look at
it in this way—The “cost of the real reward” depends in part on “the
efficiency of labour”, which element forms the first branch of the
division, and is thus included twice. I have always found great
difficulty in getting students to take in this statement of the theory
of profits, so much so that I have attempted to throw it into another
form, which I will here state for what it is worth.

I Take first the simplest conceivable case—an act of production in which
the whole process is performed by labour, and in which the return from
that labour is in commodities the same in kind as that of which the
outlay is composed. For example, 100 quarters of corn are applied to the
support of workmen who, while consuming them, produce 120 quarters. Here
it is plain the rate of profit, which is obviously 20 per cent, depends
upon two conditions and upon two conditions only—1. the real wages
necessary to command the labour of the men who produce the 120
quarters†; and 2. the productiveness of their industry in raising corn.
Diminish the productiveness of their industry, their real wages
remaining the same, and you will diminish the rate of profit; and vice
versa.

II Take now a slightly more complex case:—another set of workmen, who
also receive 100 qrs of corn, are employed in producing not corn, but
silk: while consuming those 100 qrs they produce, say, 200 lbs of
manufactured silk. What will determine the rate of profit in this case?
The outlay and the return not being homogeneous, they cannot be directly
compared: we must look at them through their values. The rate of profit
will plainly depend on the ratio which the value of the 200 lbs of silk
will bear to the value of the 100 qrs of corn which formed the means of
effecting their production. What will determine the value of the silk?
The cost of its production; but this by hypothesis is equal to the cost
of 120 qrs of corn; for it required the same Edition: current; Page:
[1049] outlay to produce both—viz. 100 qrs of corn. Hence it follows
that the rate of profit in the silk manufacture will be the same as in
agriculture. And this will be the case whatever may be the
productiveness of industry in the former branch of production. For if
the silk weavers in the supposed case were only to produce 100 lbs of
silk instead of 200, or were to produce 400, this wd not affect the
question; since in all cases alike the cost of production being the
same, the value of the return, large or small, wd be the same: its ratio
to the value of the outlay wd therefore be the same; and, therefore,
also the rate of profit.

It thus appears that the law of profit which we found to operate in the
simplest case operates also in that which we may describe as of the
first degree of complexity: the rate still depends on the real
remuneration of the labourer as compared with the productiveness of his
industry in producing his own remuneration.

III We may now introduce a second element of complication. Suppose the
outlay to consist only partly in advances to labourers, and for the rest
in the purchase of raw materials & machinery. I then proceed to show, as
in pp. 500-501 [I.412], that the latter advances are resolvable into
wages.

IV Lastly, Suppose a portion of the outlay to consist in the purchase of
a natural agent—e.g. the rent paid by the farmer to the landowner. This
is then shown not to alter the case, rent representing merely surplus
profits—the diffce between the returns on the worst soils cultivated and
the return from the better. Rent, in short, merely brings down the rate
of profit on the better soils to the general level.

The law of profit is thus found under all circumstances to be that which
we found it in the simplest case: it varies inversely—other things being
the same—with the real remuneration of the labourer; directly with the
productiveness of his industry in producing that real remuneration. But
the latter condition—the productiveness of the labourer’s industry—is
resolvable into two elements—1. the efficiency of his industry, & 2. the
fertility of the natural agents to which it is applied; or since rent,
for the reason stated, must be eliminated, rather the fertility of the
least fertile of the natural agents &c. I am thus brought by my method
to the conclusion that the rate of profit is “a function of three
variables”—viz. 1. the real remuneration of the labourer; 2. the
efficiency of his industry in producing his own remuneration; and 3. the
fertility of the [least fertile] natural agents to which this industry
is applied. It seems to me that these three elements contain all that is
included in your “cost of labour”, while they are at the same time, so
far as I see, independent and distinct.

A further case of complication arises through foreign trade. By this
means the efficiency of industry in obtaining labourers’ commodities may
be increased by improvements in industry in other departments of
production, or by occurrences in foreign countries which may affect
foreign demand. Increased efficiency of industry in manufacturing silk,
or in raising the more expensive wines, might thus tend to raise profits
in the country in which this occurred, if by means of the cheapened silk
or wine, the industry of the country was made more efficient in
obtaining labourer’s [sic] coms. So also the discovery of gold in one
country might lead to a rise of profits in another.

The only objection, I see, to the above mode of stating the theory of
profits is that it presupposes a knowledge of the laws of value and
rent. And in reply to this I can only say that I have found it much
easier to state the Edition: current; Page: [1050] latter laws without
reference to the law of profits, than to reverse the process. In fact I
have never yet succeeded in making the law of profits intelligible to a
student till I had first made him familiar with the doctrine of value;
and I accordingly now always send my students to your chapter on value
before bringing them to grapple with the former problem. I do not at all
think that it wd be desirable on this account to alter the general
arrangement of your book; but perhaps it might be worth
considering—supposing you shd concur in the above criticisms—whether it
wd not be well to confine the exposition of the doctrine in Chap. XV to
the simplest case of production (No. I on the other side),14 and reserve
the full exposition till after the chapter on “Value”. You have adopted
a similar course in other instances. [The text is unaltered at this
point. The word “purchased” objected to in Cairnes’ footnote is changed
to “procured”.]


16

I.422.7 (I.512). “The truths of political economy are truths only in the
rough.” Would it not be better to say that they express tendencies which
are liable to be counteracted? The expression “truths only in the rough”
seems to give up the scientific pretension of political economy.
[Altered; see I.422i-i.]


17

II.459.33-7ff. (I.531). “A general rise or general fall of prices. . . .
is a matter of complete indifference save in so far as it affects
existing contracts &c.”—save also in so far as it affects the interests
of those who produce money—e.g. Australia & California are interested in
maintaining a low range of general prices. Whatever tends to keep up the
value of money benefits them, and in the same degree injures the rest of
the world—so far at least as its trade with those countries is
concerned. The point may be turned to account in showing the way in
which the gold discoveries affect the world within and without the
auriferous regions. [Altered; see II.459d-d.]


18

II.808-9 (II.387-8). I ventured to advocate (Economist 4 May 1861)15 the
principle of a graduated property tax as a set off against the undue
pressure of indirect taxation on the lower class of incomes. Considering
that the bulk of our indirect taxation is raised from a few leading
articles—tea, sugar, tobacco, malt liquor, and spirits—all of which are
staple articles of consumption with the lower middle class, it must be
allowed that our indirect taxation presses with undue weight on this
section of the people. The proportion of an income of £3 or £400 a year
which is spent on such commodities is plainly much larger than that of
an income of £3 or £4000. Quoad indirect taxation, therefore, the lower
class of incomes are mulcted more heavily than the higher; and this, I
think, constitutes for the lower incomes a claim for special
consideration in the imposition of direct taxation. The principle has
already been recognized in the distinction made in favour of incomes
below £200 in laying on the income tax; but the allowance seems to me to
be altogether inadequate to meet the justice of the case. I should be
disposed to exempt altogether Edition: current; Page: [1051] incomes
under £200 a year, and carry the reduced rate of charge up at least to
£500 a year. This of course wd necessitate a higher rate on the incomes
above this level; and this is only I think what the principle of
equality demands. I regard this as the most important reform now to be
effected in the direction of financial equality. [Unaltered. The date of
Cairnes’ article in the Economist is supplied by JSM in pencil.]


19

II.813 (II.390-1). I must confess myself unable to go with you here in
your concessions to the popular argument in favour of the justice of a
uniform income tax: it seems to me that such a tax does “arithmetically
violate the rule that taxation ought to be in proportion to means”. What
are a man’s “means”? Surely they are not to be confined to that portion
of his possessions which he decides to apply to his expenditure in a
given year. I cannot understand on what principle it can be said that a
man making £1000 a year at a profession or in trade has in a given year
the same “means” as a man in possession of a fee simple property which
yields the same annual sum. Suppose the latter were to make up his mind
to sell his estate and to expend the proceeds in a single year, this
determination cd scarcely be said to add to his “means”; yet in this
case, tried by what standard you please, his “means” in this year wd
exceed the “means” during the same period of the professional man or
trader earning yearly £1000. [Unaltered.]


20

II.813.31 (II.390). “It capitalizes the incomes, but forgets to
capitalize the payments.” But why shd the payments be capitalized? The
reason for capitalizing the income is to ascertain what its owner is
worth in a given year: the thing to be compared with this is the payment
in that year—not the capitalized value of the payments in future years.
[Unaltered; but see II.814f-f.]


21

II.814.14-17 (II.391). “I wonder it does not occur . . . that precisely
because this principle of assessment wd be just in the case of a payment
made once for all, it cannot possibly be just for a permanent tax”. Here
again I am unable to follow: on the contrary my inference is exactly the
reverse. If a deduction from all incomes in proportion to their
capitalized values produce an equality of sacrifice this year, I cannot
see why a deduction carried out on the same principle next year shd not
produce the same result for that year; nor why this argument may not be
applied to all future years. [Unaltered.]


22

II.814.27-9 (II.392). “It is not because the temporary annuitant has
smaller means, but because he has greater necessities, that he ought to
be assessed at a lower rate.” But why has the temporary annuitant
greater necessities? I see no answer to this except “because he has
smaller means”. The means of the perpetual annuitant has enabled him to
make the provision for his posterity which the means of the temporary
annuitant has not yet allowed him to make. The necessity of the
temporary annuitant to provide for his family seems to me to be merely
another way of saying that he is wanting in the means which the
perpetual annuitant commands.

Edition: current; Page: [1052]
At the risk of appearing dense or perverse I have stated broadly my
inability to follow your reasoning on this doctrine of capitalization of
incomes; at the same time I do not adopt that principle as affording a
solution of the practical problem of equalizing direct taxation. Its
grand defect, as it seems to me, is that it fails to distinguish between
human requirements of very different urgency—the portion of income which
goes for necessaries or comforts which, if not strictly necessaries in a
physical sense, are at least essential to the maintenance of a standard
of decent living among the masses, and that which is expended on mere
superfluities. “Equality of sacrifice” is I am sure the sound principle;
and this can only be attained by resolving income into its parts—that
required for necessaries, that for comforts, that for luxuries &c., and
dealing with each portion on a distinct principle; the sacrifice, as you
point out, involved in a curtailment of necessaries being quite
incommensurable with that which a curtailment of mere luxuries involves.
For such distinctions the “capitalization” plan affords no field: the
whole means of every man is regarded as standing in the same relation to
his happiness—which is I think palpably a fallacious position.
[Unaltered.]


23

II.831.35-6 (II.413). “Rents, salaries, annuities, and all fixed
incomes, can be exactly ascertained”; and these, it is important to
note, yield, I think, more than three-fourths of the proceeds from the
tax. This fact, I think, considerably attenuates the practical force of
the objection founded on the demoralizing tendency of the tax.
[Unaltered.]


24

II.839.30-2 (II.423). “The necessity of advancing the tax obliges
producers and dealers to carry on their business with larger capitals
than wd otherwise be necessary”. Ricardo I think has pointed out16 that
this does not constitute (as it might at first sight seem to do) a case
of “taking more out of the pockets of taxpayers than the State
receives”; since the State gets the benefit of the advance: it is thus
enabled to dispense with Exchequer bills to the same amount, the
interest of which is saved to the community. [Altered by the addition of
footnote (II.840n) incorporating Cairnes’ wording.]


25

II.841.4-5 (II.424). “the compensation being of course at the expense of
profits”. It appears to me that the compensation wd be partly at the
expense of rent. The rise in wages, taking place through an action on
population, less food wd be required; the area of cultivation wd be
curtailed; corn rents wd fall—but, on consideration, corn being more
valuable by reason of the tax, money rents wd I believe remain as
before. I suppose profits would bear the whole compensation. [This note
cancelled by Cairnes. Unaltered.]


26

II.850ff. (II.437). § 6. I venture to point out what appears to me to be
an important condition overlooked in the reasoning in this section,—a
condition Edition: current; Page: [1053] which, taken account of,
invalidates I think altogether, or nearly altogether, the application
here made of the principle of the “Equation of International Demand” to
the subject of taxation.

In reasoning on taxation—at all events on taxation as it imposed [sic]
in civilized countries—it is proper I think to assume that a tax is only
imposed or retained where the revenue it yields is indispensable. It
follows that, in discussing the effects of a tax, we are not at liberty
to consider those effects apart from the indispensableness of the
revenue which the tax yields—in other words we are bound always to take
account of this, that the imposition or retention of any given tax will
relieve the community from taxation in some other direction. Now if this
be admitted, the conclusion seems to follow that a rise in the price of
a commodity consequent on the imposition of a tax does not necessarily
(and as I think I can show will not generally) “lessen the demand for
it.”

Let us suppose that the country requires an additional million of
revenue, and that in raising it the choice lies between an increased
duty on beer and an increased duty on tobacco. By adopting the latter
method, it is said, we should raise the price and thus check the demand
for a foreign commodity, alter international demand in our favour, and
thereby obtain our imports from the foreign country which produces
tobacco on better terms: we shd in short by this means throw a portion
of our taxation [on] a foreign country. Now granting that this reasoning
is sound, the question still remains whether precisely the same result
wd not be reached by laying the tax upon beer. Supposing the tax laid on
beer, the price of tobacco no doubt wd not rise, but the margin of the
consumer’s means available for the purchase of tobacco wd be diminished
in the same proportion as the rise in the price of tobacco in the former
case. The price of his tobacco was then higher, but he had an
undiminished income to meet it: he has now his tobacco at an unenhanced
price, but then his available means of purchase have been reduced by the
necessity of paying more for his beer.

Let me state the principle in a more general form. A man has £1000 a
year, and with this sum he obtains annually necessaries comforts and
luxuries in certain proportions. His power of commanding these things is
curtailed to a certain extent by taxation; but the amount thus deducted
from his income being given, I contend that the character of his
expenditure will not be affected by the mode in which the deduction is
made. If £50 a year be taken in the form of remitted taxes from the
price of necessaries, and placed in the form of new taxes on the price
of luxuries; or if both necessaries and luxuries are relieved at the
expense of a direct deduction from his income—so long as the total
amount taken from him is the same, I cannot see (apart from objections
to particular taxes on other grounds) why this shd affect the
proportions in which he consumes commodities. His means of commanding
commodities remains in all cases the same, and if his tastes also remain
the same, why shd the mode of taxation affect the quality of his demand?
It is conceivable indeed that for a time, the expenditure of people on
particular commodities having been regulated with reference to a certain
scale of prices, any sudden change in relative prices might induce them
to alter the character of their expenditure; but I imagine they wd very
soon ascertain what their most urgent wants were, and find also the
means of distributing their expenditure in such a way as most
effectually to satisfy them.

The above argument proceeds upon the assumption that the taxes, between
Edition: current; Page: [1054] which the alternative lies, fall upon the
same persons. In practice this is substantially the case in this country
(unless where the alternative lies between direct & indirect taxation);
our indirect taxation now being confined to a few grand staples which
are consumed by all above the worst paid classes. So far as this is the
case I think it must be allowed, that the inference contended for in §6
[II.850ff.] cannot be sustained. A given revenue being indispensable, it
cannot be admitted that a tax on a foreign commodity will lessen the
demand for it, nor therefore that it will alter the “Equation of
International Demand.”

Even in the other case—where the option lies between taxes which fall
upon different classes in the community—or in different proportions on
different classes—say between a tax on wine and a tax on paper—even in
this case the soundness of the inference, at least with a view to a
practical policy, is I think more than questionable. For 1st. Suppose a
customs’ duty on wine were substituted for an excise duty on paper—the
wine drinkers not being identical with the paper consumers, the
substitution, it may be granted, wd check the demand for wine; but then
the effects of the substitution wd not end here: as the expenses of the
wine drinkers increased, those of the consumers of paper wd be
diminished: a portion of the income of the latter wd be set free, of
which portion it is possible, and I suppose not improbable, that a share
wd be applied to the purchase of foreign commodities—say tea and sugar.
[So] far as this was the case, what was gained for the Equation of
International Demand [by(?)] the retrenchment on wine wd be lost in the
increased expenditure on the foreign articles of a different [kind
thus(?)] brought into increased requisition. Further, even supposing
something were gained for [the(?) Equa]tion of International Demand by
this mode of distributing taxation, still I think it [might be(?)]
questioned if this wd be a gain to the community. To show this, let us
take the case which wd be most favourable for your argument—a tax
transferred from a commodity of domestic production to one of foreign,
so similar in its nature that one may become a substitute for the other;
a substitution of a customs’ duty on cheap French wines in lieu of an
excise duty on light ale will furnish an example in point. Now the
effect of such a change wd probably be to check the demand for the
foreign commodity, and so far as this was the case to alter
international demand in our favour. We shd get consequently our imports
on better terms; but this wd not be clear gain. It wd be accomplished at
the expense of forcing people by an artificial arrangement of price, to
consume an inferior liquor, or one at least less suited to their tastes:
it wd be an artificial interference with the natural course of human
desires. The case wd not, so far as I can see, differ in principle from
a protective duty: the distinction wd be this, that whereas a protective
duty gives artificial encouragement to the production at home of a
commodity which cd be obtained more cheaply from abroad, an import duty
of the kind we are considering wd encourage the home production, not
indeed of a commodity which cd better be obtained from foreign
countries, but of an inferior substitute for such a commodity.

The principle, of which I have endeavoured to exhibit some of the
applications—the principle that the operation of a tax must properly be
regarded in relation to the whole income of the community as affected by
taxation—has other important bearings in connexion with the theory of
taxation. If the position which I have taken be sound it leads to this
conclusion, that the question of encouraging particular modes of
expenditure is not one which it is competent to a financial minister to
entertain; for, as I have shown, this can only be done by shifting the
burden of taxation from one class to another; Edition: current; Page:
[1055] and as regards the relative pressure of taxation, the rule for
him is equality. It seems to me therefore that the objection to a tax
that it is a tax on knowledge is not a sound objection; for supposing
the persons affected by the paper duty paid no more than their fair
proportion to the revenue, justice wd require that the tax [removed?]
from paper shd be reimposed on the same persons in another form; and
provided this were done the increased cheapness of paper wd not in the
least increase their ability to acquire knowledge. In practice I believe
that the abolition of the paper duty was a good financial measure;
because, the duty not being reimposed on them at least not to its full
extent in any other form—the real substitution for the duty being the
retention of a higher rate of income tax than wd otherwise have been
necessary—the effect of the abolition was to relieve the classes who
were the chief payers of the duty. But I think the true grounds on which
to have put the case wd have been the undue pressure of taxation on the
lower middle classes. Equal encouragement to knowledge wd I believe have
been afforded by a reduction of the duty on tea and sugar.

I think it therefore important to insist on this principle, as enabling
us to clear financial discussions from many irrelevant topics.

See Ricardo’s Works (McCulloch’s edition), pp. 141-142, more
particularly note to p. 142.17 [Unaltered at indicated place. The square
brackets at II.1054.25 indicate a faded word, and at II.1053.21 “[on]”,
which was mistakenly cancelled by Cairnes in a minor revision, has been
inserted.]

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1 Dec., 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

5.


MILL TO CAIRNES

Saint Véran, Avignon

1 Dec., 1864

.

Am I right in thinking that among the improvements consequent on the
Irish famine and emigration, the desuetude of cottier tenancy is not
one? My impression is that the land is still mainly let direct to the
labourer, without the intervention of a capitalist farmer—and if so,
other things in Ireland being as they are, all the elements of the
former overpopulation are still there, though for the present
neutralized by the emigration. I very much wish to hear from you whether
I am right.

Have you formed any opinion, or can you refer me to any good authority,
respecting the ordinary rate of mercantile and manufacturing profit in
the United States? I have hitherto been under the impression that it is
much higher than in England, because the rate of interest is so. But I
have lately been led to doubt the truth of this impression, because it
seems inconsistent with known facts respecting wages in America. High
profits are compatible with a high reward of the labourer through low
prices of necessaries, but they are not compatible with a high cost of
labour; and it seems to me that the very high money wages of labour in
America, the precious metals not being of lower value there than in
Europe, indicates a high cost as well as a high remuneration of labour.
Supposing profits to be lower than in Europe instead of higher, it is
yet quite intelligible that interest might be higher. There is, I
apprehend, in Edition: current; Page: [1056] America, scarcely any
unoccupied class, living on interest: almost everybody is in active
business, needing all his own capital and more too. In New England even
the banks have scarcely any deposits, the class who in England would be
depositors being there shareholders. Consequently the loan market is
hardly supplied at all from native sources, except the capital and notes
of the banking companies: and when there is a great demand for loans it
has to be supplied from the European money market, and therefore at a
rate of interest so high as to be a temptation to foreigners. I should
be much indebted to you if you could help me on this subject, as, if I
have been misleading the readers of my Political Economy, it is very
desirable that the error should be corrected in this edition.

I have been obliged to read, with a view to my new edition, the most
recent & most voluminous of Carey’s writings, his “Principles of Social
Science”:18 because his attacks on the Ricardo political economy and on
free trade are, some of them, if not new, at least made in a new shape,
and I have thought it good to give a brief refutation of them, the
rather as the book is a good deal thought of by some of the French
political economists, and is helping to muddle their ideas. The parts of
his speculations which I have had to attack are really the best parts,
as it was not worth while to notice any of his errors but those which
had some affinity with truths. But it really would be a useful exercise
for any clearheaded and painstaking student of political economy to shew
up the book, for I think I never met with any modern treatise with such
an apparatus of facts and reasonings, in which the facts were so
untrustworthy and the interpretations of fact so perverse and absurd. I
do not imagine that it would be worth your while any more than mine to
take the trouble of reviewing it, but I should very much like to see it
properly done. To give a really adequate exposure of the book would be
out of the question, for there would be something requiring comment in
every page: but a selection might be made, in a moderate compass, which
would suffice to destroy any authority the book might have. Withal I
cannot dislike the man, for his feelings, and his way of thinking on
general subjects, so far as I can perceive, are usually right.

I have not yet had any application from Longman to begin printing, but I
think it will not be long before I have.

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

6 Dec., 1864

Galway

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

6.


CAIRNES TO MILL

Galway

6 Dec., 1864

.

Your letter of the 1st. inst. reached me here yesterday. I hope in about
a week to be able to answer your questions pretty fully and accurately.
Meantime, however, I will state my impression on the points to which you
refer. I believe there is no doubt that the class of cottier tenants has
been immensely reduced in Ireland, and that the causes now in operation
are tending rapidly to its Edition: current; Page: [1057] entire
extinction. I gave some figures from the census of 1861 illustrating
this point in an article on “Ireland” in the Edin. Review of last
Jany—;19 and it is quite certain that the movement has made great
progress since 1861. That “the elements of over population” however,
still exist in Ireland is, I regret to say, but too undeniable. They
exist in the wretched morale of the agricultural population brought
almost to the level of the brute by centuries of neglect and oppression,
and which I fear it will take more than one generation of good
influences to effect any substantial change in; and they exist also in
that recklessness of mind which dependence on the labour market—the
condition of all the ex-cottiers who have not died or emigrated—seems in
my mind inevitably to engender. So much so that I see for my part no
hope of effectually elevating the mass of the Irish working population
than by measures which may ultimately have the effect of dissociating
them altogether from their present mode of life. Something may I think
be done in this way by facilitating the acquisition of land in small
parcels—i.e. by encouraging the growth of a peasant proprietary; more by
developing manufactures or other non-agricultural pursuits, such as
mining, and bringing to bear upon the people thus brought together the
influences which are now working such wonders in the manufacturing
districts of England. Lastly the extensive conversion of the land to
grass will render a smaller population necessary; and, now that the
emigration movement is in full swing, this may be effected without
severe suffering. By such means I think the number of the population
dependent on the agricultural labour market may be greatly reduced,
while those which are drawn off will be brought within the range of
ameliorative influences. Up to the present, however, I think you may
take this for granted that, so far as cottiers have been converted into
labourers, no good has been done. For the present the rate of wages may
be somewhat higher than formerly; but if it were not for the emigration
it might be confidently predicted that within a generation it would be
reduced once more to the starvation point—even with the emigration I
dont feel very sanguine that they will be avoided. In these remarks I
speak of the cottier & labouring class: with the class above them—the
farmer class, and such a class is beyond question growing up in Ireland,
the case is much more hopeful. Real progress has I think already been
made here; and I think it only needs such measures as Judge Longfield
has advocated to accelerate this progress greatly. But on this, as well
as the former point I hope to write to you more fully and with greater
confidence after I have returned to Dublin and conversed with the Judge
and some others whose practical acquaintance with the country is far
more extensive than mine.

As to the rate of mercantile and manufacturing profit in the U.S., I
have written to a quarter from which I have good hopes of getting
information. I have indeed hitherto taken the supposed high rate of
profit in the U.S. for granted. The high rate of money wages certainly
would make one suspect the correctness of this view, but the fact is not
conclusive. The precious metals may not be lower in value in America
than in Europe, but their cost is certainly lower; the only question is
whether it is so much lower as to render the high rate of money wages
which prevails consistent with a rate of profit also higher than, or as
high as, in this country. In what you say on the rate of interest in its
relation to profit I entirely concur. You will find something on this
point in my notes.20

Edition: current; Page: [1058]
I send by this post a second batch of notes which I submit to you for
what they are worth—I do not at all expect you will find them of any
real use, but I rejoice at the opportunity of passing my speculations
under your eye. I shall learn whether there is any value in them: should
you think so, and turn it to account in any way, it will be to me a
source of real gratification.

I should like to write to you on other topics you refer to, but I am
anxious not to lose this post, and will therefore bring this to a close.
. . .

I hope you received the batch of notes sent with a letter about a week
ago. With those now sent I send also a number of the N. British Review
with an article of mine on Capital & Currency,21 which perhaps you will
do me the favour of reading.

[Further Notes on the Fifth Edition of the Principles]


1

II.647-59 (Book III, Chap. xxiii). The doctrine laid down here is that
the rate of interest is “a question of demand and supply” [II.647.22] .
. . “The rate of interest will be such as to equalize the demand for
loans with the supply of them” [II.647.24-5]. Thus far I agree; but
loans of what? You say of “capital”—Here I join issue with you. It
cannot be denied that the thing lent is money—the medium of exchange;
but you say that, though money passes formally, in reality it is
“capital” which in such transactions is passed from hand to hand. I
maintain, on the contrary, 1. that in the case of a large class of loans
“capital” does not pass in any sense other than that in which the word
is identified either with the medium of exchange or with commodities
consumed unproductively—that is to say, in which either “capital” and
“currency” or “capital” and “non-capital” are confounded; 2. that where
in a certain sense “capital” may be said to pass—i.e., where the money
borrowed is employed in the purchase of “capital”—this does not entitle
us to call the money, “capital”,—to say that the transaction is one in
which “capital”, not money, is borrowed, or, if it does, then in an
ordinary sale we ought to speak of the commodity sold being exchanged
for capital, when the money obtained in exchange is applied in the same
manner—in short according to this way of speaking, all that portion of
the circulating medium which is employed in effecting exchanges of
“capital” shd be called “capital”; 3. that the straining of
nomenclature, as is done in such explanations, is prejudicial to a clear
apprehension of the monetary phenomena, introducing verbal
inconsistencies which react on our conceptions, and preventing us from
perceiving, or causing us to perceive but obscurely, the operation of
some powerful, but not obvious, influences on the course of the Money
Market.

I will take these points in order, and set down what occurs to me on
each head.

1. I say that in a large class of loans “capital” does not pass in any
sense other than &c. This, I think, is involved in your admission at p.
192 [II.648] where you distinguish loans into those for productive and
those for unproductive uses. Taking the case of money lent to a Govt to
be expended in war, or to a spendthrift to be expended in profligacy—the
money itself is here not “capital”, Edition: current; Page: [1059] if
any distinction between capital and currency is to be preserved; nor are
the things on which it is spent “capital”, unless we obliterate the
distinction between productive and unproductive wealth. Apply your own
test—“the mind” of the person owning the wealth—and I think you must
admit that the loan belongs to the category—“not capital”. (Vol. I, pp.
68-70 [I.55-7]). I can imagine still another ground taken: it may be
said that the money borrowed by Govt or by the spendthrift wd, but for
their competition, have passed into the hands of productive borrowers,
and that it may therefore be regarded as so much capital withdrawn from
the market. But, first, the statement is not strictly true: a portion—I
fancy no inconsiderable portion—of the money obtained by Govt is
attracted to the loan market by the enhanced rate of interest caused by
Govt demand, and wd but for this inducement have been employed
unproductively: so far as this is the case, the effect of the Govt loan
is merely to substitute one kind of unproductive expenditure for
another; and, secondly, this way of describing the operation appears to
me to obscure its real character, for an analysis of which see N.B.
article pp. 204-205.22

2. I cannot see why, because the money borrowed is afterwards applied to
the purchase of “capital”, it shd therefore be said that “capital” is
borrowed. We do not use language in this way in speaking of purchase and
sale, why shd we do so in speaking of loans. Besides the way of using
language is open to the serious of [sic] objection of comprising, and in
fact confounding, under the same description two perfectly distinct
acts—acts which are often separated by a considerable interval of time.
The lending of the money produces a certain effect—an effect which is
realized whether the subsequent purchase takes place or not: the
purchase also when it takes place produces an effect, but this effect wd
be quite the same though the money had not been borrowed. A nomenclature
which precludes the possibility of distinguishing effects distinct in
their character, and separated in point of time must I think be
pronounced especially vicious.

3. I say the received mode of stating the doctrine involves verbal
inconsistencies which react on our conceptions, and are prejudicial to a
clear apprehension of monetary phenomena. I will give a few instances.
In describing at pp. 37-38 [II.528-9] the nature of the service
performed by banks of deposit, you say that they collect together the
scattered “sums” which individuals wd otherwise have to keep as
reserves; the aggregate of which being more than sufficient, when
collected into one fund, as a reserve against the liabilities it has to
provide for, the greater part is lent out to producers and dealers;
“thereby”, you say, “adding the amount, not indeed to the capital in
existence, but to that in employment, and making a corresponding
addition to the aggregate production of the community.” Now here it
seems to me there is verbal inconsistency. The “sums” which individuals
hold in reserve against liabilities are clearly money, not capital; and
all that your description proves is that Banks of deposit add to the
money in employment, yet, without assigning reason for the change in the
phraseology, you substitute the word “capital” for “sums”, which I think
must be regarded as meaning “money”. But further it seems to me that
this use of language not merely obscures the real nature of the function
performed by banks of deposit, but has even led you into a slight
inaccuracy of doctrine. For the true nature of the process, I take it,
is this. The Banks by collecting together the stagnant money of the
country and Edition: current; Page: [1060] rendering it active, cause an
effect on prices, which results in increased importation, the money
rendered redundant, through the economy effected by the banks, passing
out of the country. The result of the whole is a larger amount of
consumable commodities in the country and less money. The addition of
consumable commodities may be employed productively, or they [sic] may
not:* if they are not, then the banks have neither increased capital in
the country, nor have they rendered it more active: if the new
commodities are employed productively, then the banks have added to the
aggregate amount of capital in the country. In no case can I see that
banks have any tendency to render “capital” more active. They render
“money” more active, by this means economize “money”, thereby enable us
to dispense with a portion and get capital in exchange, and add to the
aggregate amount of capital in the country in which they are
established: ultimately, if the cause be traced to its last result, as
it is in another passage by you, they add to the capital in existence by
superseding the necessity of a portion of that which is employed in
producing money, & thus setting it free for other purposes. Perfectly
analogous is the effect of the economy of credit—e.g. bank notes. The
credit instruments cannot [like coin(?)] go abroad; but in proportion as
they are economized or as cheaper forms of credit are substituted for
dearer, a smaller amount of capital is required for carrying on the
business of circulation in a country, and the portion saved is set free
for other occupations.

Further I have said that this straining of nomenclature prevents us from
perceiving, or causes us to perceive but obscurely, the operation of
some powerful influences on the Money Market.—On consideration I will
reserve this topic till I have stated my view of the causes governing
the rate of interest, or rather my view of the best mode of stating
those laws.

The first point, and that which is the most fundamental in the whole
matter, is to establish the relation in which the rate of interest
stands to the productive powers of capital. That relation is this: (1)
the productive powers of capital are the condition which render [sic] it
possible that interest should be permanently paid: consequently the
productiveness of capital sets the limit within which the rate of
interest over long periods must confine itself; (2) since “more will be
given for the use of money when more can be made with money”, the rate
of interest will tend† to rise and fall with the rate of profit. These
two propositions, I think, express adequately the relation in which the
rate of interest stands to capital. The fundamental importance of
appreciating that relation I fully admit; but I do not admit that the
importance of securing this result justifies in [sic] so stating the
doctrine as to shut out from view the Edition: current; Page: [1061]
relation in which the same phenomenon stands to money. This I think the
received formula does. The rate of interest, then, though permanently
limited by the productiveness of capital, and though tending to follow
the variations in that productiveness, is temporarily not limited by any
thing, but the actual pecuniary means of borrowers at the time of
effecting the loan, and does not, with any general conformity follow the
fluctuations in the rate of profit, often rising when profit—i.e. the
productiveness of capital—is falling, & vice versa; the tendency noticed
being constantly more or less neutralized and frequently wholly overcome
by influences of an opposite kind. What then are the proximate causes on
which the rate of interest depends?—I answer simply—on “the demand &
supply of the community in relation to the amount of its money* (using
the word in a large sense to include circulating medium of every kind
which practically possesses purchasing or paying power according to the
purpose for which the loan is made) disposable on loan.” (This statement
of the doctrine differs in words only from that given by Tooke in his
tract on the Currency 1826—for my view of which I refer you to N.B.
Review, pp. 199-201.)24 This mode of stating the doctrine brings me
directly into conflict with the proposition which you lay down p. 197
[II.653b-b657]—viz. “An increase of the currency has in itself no
effect, and is incapable of having any effect on the rate of interest.”
I venture to maintain as against this, that “an increase of the currency
is capable of affecting the rate of interest, and as a matter of fact
almost invariably does affect it in one direction or the other.” Let us
consider this point.

An increase of the currency (understanding by currency for the present
simply circulating medium in any form which practically possesses
purchasing & paying power) must take effect in one or other of two
ways:—either through the medium of a loan, or through that of purchase:
the persons into whose hands the new currency first comes either lend
it, or spend it. Now in either case I contend that the augmentation will
tend to affect the rate of interest. I observe you draw a distinction
(p. 198 [II.653b-b657]) between issues “as currency” and issues “as
loans.” But this distinction seems to me exactly to beg the question in
dispute. You say the issue are “loans”—no doubt—but loans of what?—of
capital? This I deny and refer you back on this point to my previous
arguments. I say that they are “loans of currency” just as truly as
money handed over the counter in exchange for a commodity is payment in
currency. Well if I am right in this it certainly follows that an
increase of currency is capable of affecting the rate of
interest—further the illustration shows, that, when the increase takes
place by way of loan, its tendency is to depress the rate of interest.
In conformity with the doctrine as stated above:—the supply of money
disposable on loan being increased, while the demand by hypothesis
remains the same, the rate of interest falls. Now take the other case,
suppose the increase of the currency to take place through the medium of
purchase, here again the rate of interest will be affected, though in an
opposite direction. For the effect of an augmentation of the currency by
means of purchase is to raise prices. Now as prices rise, the pecuniary
needs of borrowers will increase, the demand for money on loan will
therefore increase; but the supply of disposable money, according to our
hypothesis, remaining as before, the rate Edition: current; Page: [1062]
of interest will rise. Another consideration, noticed by you, will tend
to strengthen this tendency: if the depreciation of the circulating
medium be so rapid as to be perceptible, this will affect the
inclination of those in possession of money to lend: thus at the same
time that the demand for money on loan will increase, the supply will
diminish; both changes operating in the same direction—towards an
elevation of the rate.

And now, reverting to the question as I left it at [II.1060.22ff.], let
us try the two theories by the only effective test—the ability of each
to explain the phenomena, and for this purpose let us take first the
effect of the gold discoveries on the rate of interest. Viewing the
occurrence through the received theory the judgment of economists was I
think in general to the effect, that the increased supplies of gold wd
have no tendency to disturb the rate of interest. The argument urged by
you p. 197 [II.653b-b657] was employed. The theory directed attention to
“capital”, as distinguished from currency; and it not being apparent
that the increased supplies of gold wd have any speedy effect in
altering the demand for capital as compared with the supply, the
decision was as I have stated. Now I think it cannot be denied that the
increased supplies of gold have in the event profoundly affected the
money-markets of the world; and further I think the doctrine, as I have
stated it above, wd if applied to the known facts of the case, have
indicated generally the course which the fluctuations have taken. Thus
that doctrine wd at once have suggested this inquiry:—into whose hands
will the new money first come?—into the hands of persons who will spend
it, or into the hands of persons who will lend it? So far as it promised
to fall into the possession of the former class we might have expected
the rate of interest to rise—so far as it promised to fall into the
possession of the latter, we might have expected it to fall. Now in the
gold countries, whither people went, not to live on their income, but to
make money rapidly, spending wd clearly be the rule; and in these we
might accordingly have expected the rate of interest rapidly to rise and
to remain constantly nearly as high as the productiveness of capital wd
admit: this in fact is what happened both in Australia & California: in
the latter country especially money on loan was scarcely to be had on
any terms: in both countries interest was for a time computed by the
month, not by the year. I do not know whether this is still the case. On
the other hand, we might have expected the rates for loans to have taken
an opposite course in Gt Britain. The new money first reached this
country principally through the hands of large capitalists. The rising
demand in the gold countries wd of course lead them to extend their
operations; but meanwhile the new gold wd find its way to the banks and
show itself in an increase of their reserves. Even when their operations
had reached the full limits of the expanding demand, still, economized
as coin is in this country, the extended business wd be far from
absorbing the whole of the new money, which wd still continue a dead
weight on the loan market. This is, as you will remember what happened.
From 1852 down to the breaking out of the Russian war the rate of
interest in England was quite abnormally low—so low as to tempt Mr
Gladstone to attempt a conversion of the 3 per cents into 2½ per cent
stock—an operation in which he failed solely through the unexpected turn
of our relations with Russia. No doubt it may be said that all this is
merely wisdom after the event; but I submit that there is nothing in the
above beyond the reach of fair inference from the theory of the rate of
interest as I have stated it taken in connexion with the known facts of
the case.

Edition: current; Page: [1063]
Again, I will give another example of the way in which, as it seems to
me, the received mode of stating the law of interest the real operation
of causes affecting the money market [sic]. Take a case which has
occurred lately in which, owing to the sudden failure of a leading
staple, there has happened a great derangement in the course of trade.
The effect of such a derangement invariably is to cause a rise in the
rate of interest. Why? I really do not clearly see how the fact wd be
explained on the principles of the received doctrine. I do not think it
cd be done at all without a very violent straining of words. But I will
state how I wd explain it on my mode of conceiving the theory. In the
case supposed—a derangement of trade from the failure of a leading
staple—the rate of interest tends to rise chiefly from a diminution in
the supply of lendable money, but this tendency may be strengthened by a
simultaneous increase of demand; though it is possible also that the
effect on demand may be in the opposite direction; and may in some
degree neutralize the tendency of the other agent in the change. The
effect on the demand for money on loan depends upon this—will the
aggregate sum applied to the purchase of the staple be increased or the
contrary? The price may so rise as to check the demand very greatly, so
that on the whole the sum applied to the purchase of the scarce article
will be less than before: this was I believe the case for some time with
cotton on the first breaking out of the American war; but, speaking from
memory, the Board of Trade returns have lately shown a larger aggregate
expenditure on cotton than in the times of its abundance. In the latter
state of affairs, the pecuniary requirements of borrowers in cotton
manufacturing will be augmented; consequently the effect of the failure
must be to increase the demand for money on loan: in the former state,
of course the effect wd be the opposite. So far as to demand. But in all
circumstances a derangement of trade from the cause supposed, indeed
from any cause, wd be to diminish for a considerable time the supply of
lendable money. For its effect is to send us to other countries in
search of the staple which has failed us in its usual field. Now when a
trade is opened for the first time with a new country it is an almost
invariable rule that for a time, more or less extended, it is carried
on, on one side, in the precious metals. It wd be an extraordinary
circumstance if the failure which in 1856 & 57 sent us to China for silk
shd have synchronized with an accident which shd have sent the Chinese
to us for goods to the same value. It may therefore be assumed as a rule
that a derangement in trade necessitates a larger use of gold and silver
international transactions. Where is this gold & silver to come from? In
the main it must come from the stocks which are held as the disposable
reserve in commercial countries. The supply of money on loan is thus
diminished, and a rise in the rate of interest is the natural result.*
The above conditions supply I think all the elements for a solution of
the problem: can it be said that the received doctrine supplies those
elements? That doctrine wd, I think, direct the attention of the
inquirer to the loss of “capital” incident to the failure of the staple.
Now though the phenomena which result may no doubt be traced back to
this fact, these phenomena take their shape & character, not Edition:
current; Page: [1064] at all from the fact itself, but from the way in
which the occurrence happens to affect the pecuniary apparatus by which
trade is carried on. For example, supposing the loss were one which
could be repaired by a diversion of production within the limits of our
own country, or within some civilized country, not given to hoarding and
with tastes already formed for our commodities—in this case, although we
were quite as slow in repairing the loss, the effect on the rate of
interest wd be very different from that which wd be experienced if we
were obliged to resort for the deficient article to a semi-barbarous
country. Nor wd the circumstance that the failing staple were an element
of “capital” affect the result in the least: if it were a finished
manufacture suited only to luxurious consumption the effect wd, or at
least might be, quite the same.

I could multiply these illustrations very considerably, but probably I
have now said enough to give you a fair idea of the view for which I
seek to obtain a hearing. If I were asked to characterize it by a word I
should say that it regards the rate of interest as essentially a
“monetary” phenomenon; whereas it has hitherto been represented as
expressing a relation of “capital”, as distinguished from money.
Monetary science in short, as a department of political economy,
resolves itself, according to my notion, into two leading
departments—prices and the rate of interest—or, as we might describe
them, the value of money in relation to commodities at a given time, and
its value in relation to itself at different times. All classifications
of the circulating medium shd I think be made with reference to the
convenience of interpretation in regard to these two classes of
phenomena.

As an example of what I mean I will venture to lay before you a
speculation as to the definition of money, which I had hoped before now
to have brought before the Pol. Economy Club.

Let me first state what I understand to be the true criteria of a
definition in Political Economy. The purpose of definition in P.E. is, I
think, altogether analogous to its purpose in the physical sciences, say
in Chemistry—namely to classify phenomena with a view to their
interpretation. That classification of economic phenomena will be best,
& therefore those definitions will be best, which mark those relations
in the facts of wealth which are most important in determining the laws
of its production and distribution. (I may observe here by the way that,
if this view be sound, definitions in Pol. Economy should not be
regarded, as Senior regards them, as the bases of our reasoning, and as
final, but merely as provisional expedients to be constantly modified
with the progress of our economic knowledge—as, in short, registers of
the state of that knowledge.) The business of defining in P.E.,
therefore, is more than a verbal affair: it involves a question as to
the relative importance of external facts. It is also indeed in some
degree a question of words, inasmuch as P.E. deals in popular language,
and it will always be desirable, as far as possible, to use words in
such a sense that they shall suggest the right ideas. Well, keeping
these two criteria of sound definition in view the question I have to
consider is—What is the best definition of money?

The purpose of a definition of money, agreeably to the foregoing view,
will be to assist the interpretation of monetary phenomena: these
phenomena resolve themselves into two grand divisions—prices, and
(according to my notions) Edition: current; Page: [1065] the rate of
interest. Confining ourselves, for the present, to the first class of
phenomena, let us observe the relation in which the several portions of
the circulating medium stand to them. And first we may note this fact,
that in one point all the elements of the circulating medium agree;—they
are all capable of affecting prices; and further none of them affect
prices unless so far as they are actually employed as instruments of
purchase. I need not illustrate this position as I know you will accept
it. But, secondly, there is this difference between certain elements of
the circulation and others, that the action of some upon prices is what,
for want of a better word, I will call “unconditional”, while that of
others is “conditional”. One condition indeed must be satisfied in all
cases—the circulating medium, whatever its nature, must be used—used I
mean as an instrument of demand. But assuming this condition to be
fulfilled, one portion of the circulating medium is capable, not only of
raising prices but of permanently sustaining them at the enhanced level;
while other portions may raise prices, but whether they are capable of
keeping them up or not depends on the fulfilment of a condition which
has no place in the former case. Thus an increase of coin (on the
assumption only that the persons into whose hands it comes be willing to
use it) will, other things being the same, not merely raise prices for
once, or keep them up for a time, but will permanently maintain them at
the level to which it has raised them; the same may be said of
inconvertible bank notes; but it is otherwise with credit in all its
forms. So long as the credit circulation is trusted, it is perfectly
efficacious in its action on price, but distrust at once smites it with
impotence. The power of the credit circulation in every form (bank notes
included) to uphold price depends upon the condition that the promise
which it implies be performed, or at least that there be belief that
this shall be done.

Now this distinction suggests some important inferences. It follows from
it, for example, that, while any cause calculated to cheapen coin or to
augment the supply of inconvertible notes tends to raise permanently the
level of prices over the field throughout which these media circulate,
and thus permanently to depreciate the currency over this area; an
increased facility of creating credit instruments, even though resulting
in an increased supply of these instruments, has no such tendency.
Temporarily indeed an effect on prices may be produced, but whether that
effect be permanently sustained depends, not on the facilities of
creating credit media of exchange, but on the possibility of maintaining
a sufficient supply of that commodity—gold or silver—in which the credit
instruments are made payable, to enable the promises embodied in those
instruments to be made good. Thus a discovery of gold or silver mines
tends with certainty to raise prices and to depreciate those metals. But
improvements in banking have no tendency permanently to depreciate the
currency in the country in which they occur. They may indeed depreciate
it slightly for a time till the excess in the circulation be got rid of;
but so soon as this happens prices will return to their ordinary gold or
silver level. The distinction again will throw light upon a point around
which in the early days of the Bank Charter Act discussion much vehement
controversy took place. In those days the stereotyped explanation of the
monetary phenomena incident to all periods of speculative excitement
was—the banks forced their issues into circulation; prices were driven
up &c., &c. The evidence indeed of all competent bankers showed
conclusively that the banks had no power of the kind attributed to them;
but in spite of reiterated denials, the explanation was still put
forward, still apparently believed in by those who advanced it, and I
think was generally accepted by Edition: current; Page: [1066] loose
thinkers as satisfactory. The plausibility of the explanation consisted,
I think, in this:—It was certain that the banks were anxious to find
employment for their reserves: the low rate of interest proved this: now
this anxiety on the part of the banks implied the power on the part of
all persons in fair credit to obtain the command of purchasing power. In
fact the credit, whether of the banks or of individuals, represented
purchasing power; and it was assumed that this undefined store of
purchasing power being left free from all legislative restraint wd
surely be used. Such an inference wd be perfectly just if the purchasing
power consisted in gold and silver. If the Banks, for example, had each
a gold mine in its vault, and the large capitalists each a Fortunatus’
purse in his pocket, purchasing power of this sort wd quite certainly be
brought into exercise and force up prices; but purchasing power resting
on credit differed from purchasing power resting on coin in this, that
it cd not be put in operation without bringing those who employed it
under an obligation to make good the amt at some time or other in
specie. Individuals and institutions, accordingly, who were in good
credit, sensible of this, wd of course refuse to employ their credit in
unproductive expenditure, and were deterred from employing it in
productive operation unless where they saw their way or thought they saw
their way to turning their capital with a profit. Hence the
justification of the position maintained with so much ability by Tooke,
that overtrading and speculative extravagance were due, not to the
facilities afforded by credit establishments, but to the prospects,
well-founded or delusive, of turning increased capital (I use the word
in the received sense) with a profit.

There is also another position of Tooke, in his treatment of it assuming
sometimes I think a paradoxical character, which receives elucidation
from the same distinction. Tooke maintained that “the prices of
commodities do not depend on the quantity of money as indicated by the
amount of bank notes, nor upon the amount of the whole circulating
medium, but, on the contrary, that the amount of bank notes & of the
circulating medium is the consequence of prices.”25 The doctrine
encountered abundant ridicule from Colonel Torrens and other writers of
his school: nevertheless I have not the least doubt that the principle
laid down is both true and important. The whole plausibility of the
objection to the doctrine depends upon one ignoring the distinction
which I am contending for. The statement wd be palpably absurd if made
with regard to coin, or inconvertible currency: it seems to me to be not
less clearly true when the allegation is confined to a credit
circulation. The truth which the proposition embodies is this, that in a
country like England, where the great mass of the circulation consists
of instruments of credit, the proximate cause of prices is opinion—the
opinion of merchants and dealers as to the value of commodities
estimated in gold: when, for example the price of a given commodity
rises, the fact indicates that, in the opinion of the dealers in that
commodity, its value, until the present stock of it be consumed or until
an increased supply be obtained, may be maintained at that level in
relation to gold and silver or, what comes to the same thing, paper
convertible into gold or silver: the judgment to this effect once being
formed by those who have credit at their command, this credit is (to
borrow an expression of yours) “coined” into bills, cheques and other
convenient forms. The advance in price is thus not caused by an increase
of the circulating medium, but on the contrary the increase in the
circulating medium is caused by the advance of price. (I think, by the
way, that this analysis shows that credit may influence prices
potentially—I mean without being Edition: current; Page: [1067] actually
offered for commodities: the belief that it wd be offered or that at
some future time it will be offered is sufficient to induce the holders
of the commodity to raise their terms. The same qualification must, I
rather think, be applied also in the case of coin.)

Once more, the distinction for which I contend enables us to answer a
question about which much confused argument was put forward some years
ago—the question whether in estimating the probable effects of the gold
discoveries we should compare the new increments of gold with the stock
of the metal in existence, or with the composite aggregate of metal,
circulating paper, and credit of all kinds. I remember M. Leon Faucher26
maintained that it was with the latter body that the comparison shd be
made; and the same position was maintained in the Times no longer ago
than a year27 by less known names. But with the distinction which I have
stated in view, it is quite plain that the position is fallacious. The
(gold & silver) prices which at present prevail in commercial countries
are, as permanent phenomena, the consequence of the quantity of gold &
silver which is maintained there, not at all of the quantity of credit
in circulation; this being, on the contrary as we have seen, the effect,
instead of the cause of prices.

I have now pointed out one important distinction between coin and
inconvertible notes on the one hand, & credit media of circulation on
the other—the circumstance that the one class act “unconditionally” on
prices and are therefore capable of “permanently” sustaining them, while
the sustaining power of the other is conditional & liable at any moment
to break down. Closely connected with this is another important
distinction—the elasticity of credit as compared with coin (as compared
also with inconvertible notes). This elasticity may conduce, in a
certain state of public feeling, to intensify oscillations of price; but
it may also, (and this is its more frequent though less noticed effect),
be made the means of moderating such oscillations.* By following up this
line of speculation we shd be led to the true conditions on which the
stability of a credit system depends—those conditions being—(1) sound
views amongst the mercantile community as to the causes affecting the
supply and demand of commodities, (2) entire freedom in the use of
credit, and lastly (3) the habitual maintenance of a large reserve of
gold or silver. The Bank Act of 1844, founded as it is on a theory of
currency essentially unsound, so far as it has any operation, tends, as
I conceive, to aggravate all the causes which conduce to instability. On
this point I refer to N.B. Review, pp. 211 et seq.28

The result of the foregoing investigation has been, to show that, as
regards the phenomena of price, the most important distinction among the
elements of the circulating medium lies between coin and inconvertible
notes† on the one Edition: current; Page: [1068] hand and instruments of
credit on the other. This distinction I wd mark by confining the term
“money” to the two former; of money therefore there wd be two
sorts—metallic and paper money (the latter being inconvertible notes):
all the rest wd come under the general head of “credit.” We might,
agreeably with this view, define money as consisting of those kinds of
exchange media of which the purchasing & paying power is unconditional,
or of which the power of sustaining prices can never suffer defalcation.
I have treated the question so far solely with reference to the
phenomena of price, but it is plain that an examination of it with
reference to those of the rate of interest wd lead us to precisely the
same conclusion; the purposes for which circulating medium is borrowed
having always direct regard to its purchasing and paying power.
(Supposing this definition to be adopted, it wd be necessary to
substitute in the statement of the law governing the rate of interest
(as given ante II.1060-1) for “money”, the words circulating medium
possessing at the time of the loan purchasing or paying power.)
[Altered; see e.g. II.650c-c, 651a-a, 651c-c, 651d, 651f-f652, 653a-a,
653b-b657.]


2

II.665 (II.208-9). I understand you to admit here that the contrivance
of the Act—i.e. the separation of departments combined with the
restriction placed on the power of issue—does in some degree “prevent
the ultimate aggravation of the severity” of a commercial crisis. I
cannot but think that in doing so you make a concession which the facts
of the case do not call for. I cannot see that the “retardation” of a
crisis must necessarily or would probably, aggravate its severity. If
the retardation occurred during the “ascending period”, obviously enough
it wd have this effect. Doubtless too it wd have this effect if it took
place during the “quiescent state”. But the highest point having been
reached and the descent having commenced, I should expect that the more
gradual the descent, the more it wd allow time for the disentangling of
sound from unsound speculation; and that, on the contrary, a very abrupt
collapse of the markets wd be well calculated to bring down solvent and
insolvent houses, solid and bubble schemes, in one general ruin—in fact
to produce a crisis which otherwise might never have happened. There is
a phrase that is frequently in the mouths of the admirers of the
Act—that of “clearing the air”; but experience seems to show that those
sudden oscillations in the rate of interest which the Act produces,
while they are quite sufficient to send into the Gazette men who are
afterwards able to pay 20s. in the £, are very far from being certainly
efficacious in searching out the rotten parts of our commercial economy.
How many bubble schemes have been exploded in times of commercial
quiescence; while the very worst and most disgraceful speculations which
the country has seen have lived through all the rigours of the most
violent crisis. To mention one instance, that gigantic scheme of
complicated fraud organized in the leather trade survived the crisis of
1857, though now known to have been at that time in a state of
bankrupcy—survived “the clearing of the air” of that time to succumb in
the comparatively mild season of some years ago. The truth, as I fancy,
is, that the detection and explosion of rotten schemes depends less upon
the stringency of the money market than on the private knowledge of
creditors as to the position of persons and houses with whom they have
transactions. In a period of alarm suspicion is generally
undiscriminating, so that it becomes a good deal a matter of chance on
whom the pressure falls. In connexion with the point now under
discussion I venture to think that you do not sufficiently advert to the
fact, that Edition: current; Page: [1069] neither at this stage—the
commencement of the decline—any more than at any other stage, does the
Act make any provision that the Bank shall not continue its advances
until its reserve is absolutely exhausted: if the Bank contracts its
operations a moment before this consummation is reached, it is in
deference to its own discretion, not at all to any restraint imposed by
the law. This is in truth a vital point in connexion with the
theoretical justification of the Act, because the doctrine originally
laid down, and still frequently assumed as realized in practice, was
that the Act took the management of the currency out of the reach of
individual discretion and placed it under a self-acting law: in fact
nothing is more certain than that the stability of our currency rests
now as much on the discretion of individuals as it ever did. This has
indeed become so apparent that the defence of the Act is now generally
shifted—at least by its more judicious advocates—from theoretical to
practical grounds—practical grounds which directly negative its
theoretical pretensions. It is said that the Act virtually compels the
Bank to raise the rate of interest under a drain at an earlier period
than it otherwise wd do. Doubtless it does: if the Bank did not raise
the rate of interest sooner now than under the old system, the certain
result wd be that it wd find itself, at what under the old system wd be
an early stage of the movement, at the end of its resources. But does
this constitute a practical justification of the Act? It creates an
artificial pitfall, and because efforts are made, more or less
successfully, to avoid the snare, its admirers take credit for having
added to our security, and point triumphantly to the strainings of the
endangered parties as conclusive evidence of the wisdom and benevolence
of the law! What those who undertake to defend the Act on practical
grounds ought to show, is, either that it renders the task of
maintaining the stability of our credit system more easy than formerly,
or, failing this, that it provides for the exercise on the part of the
Bank directors of a larger and surer discretion. The former end it
certainly has not accomplished: on the contrary the separation of the
departments by splitting the reserve in two combined with the
restriction on issue has enormously enhanced the difficulty of the
problem; while, as regards the latter point, though public criticism has
done something towards quickening the discretion of the Bank directors
(as it wd with the progress of monetary knowledge under any system),
this cannot be ascribed in any degree to the influence of the Act of
1844, the teaching of whose promoters was, as the Times once put it,
that “it was for bankers to look to their own interest, leaving the
currency under Sir. R. Peel’s Act, to take care of itself.”30 [Unaltered
in specified place.]


3

II.649-50 and 667-8 (II.194 and 212-13). In the former passage p. 194
[II.649-50], you enumerate, as constituting the elements of “the general
loan fund of the country”—“the disposable capital deposited in banks or
represented by bank-notes (I am not quite clear whether the expression
“or represented by bank notes” is intended to qualify “disposable
capital”, or “disposable capital deposited in banks”—in other words
whether you intend it as an equivalent expression for “deposited in
banks”, or as denoting a particular form in which such deposits may be
made), together with the funds of those who . . . live upon the interest
of their property” [II.649.42-650.5]; and in the reasoning in pp. 212-13
[II.667-8] these seems [sic] to be the only elements of the loan fund
Edition: current; Page: [1070] which you contemplate. But surely there
is another very important one—the credit of bankers,* as distinct both
from the sums lodged with them on deposit, and from the notes which they
hold, or under the present law, may issue. The reasoning in pp. 212-13
[II.667-8] appears to proceed upon the assumption that when a bank
discounts a bill, it must either issue notes to the person from whom the
bill is obtained, or encroach (in order to discount the bill) on the
money lying with them in deposit. But, as I understand the matter, the
bank may, and in the great majority of instances does, adopt neither of
these courses: may it not simply place the amount to the credit of the
person from whom it receives the bill, leaving him to draw against it at
his convenience; and may not the cheques thus drawn be lodged again in
the bank, the amt being simply transferred from the credit of drawer to
that of the drawee? or if not lodged in the bank which originally
discounted the bill, it might be lodged in [some (?)] other, with whom
an exchange wd be effected through the Clearing House. If I correctly
conceive the process, it seems to me that the banks possess an
indefinite fund from [wh (?)] to extend monetary accomodation to the
public, without sensibly increasing their issue, or touching the funds
left with them in deposit—a fund of which the only limit is the prudence
[of (?)] the managers of each institution. Supposing my notion to be
right as to what happens in a large class of [cases when (?)] a bill is
discounted, I presume the sum, written down by the bank to the credit of
[the (?)] person presenting the bill, wd be regarded as a “deposit”. I
have no authoritat[ive] knowledge as to how the matter stands, but I
presume this is so. If so, it is a ver[y im]portant consideration; for
“deposits” are commonly supposed to represent reso[urces(?)] of the bank
as well as liabilities; but a deposit occurring in the way I hav[e]
described wd represent a liability only. I think it wd be very desirable
if this point were cleared up, but I have not here access to any one
sufficiently informe[d] to enlighten me. [Altered; see II.650c-c and b-b
(referring to “disposable capital”).]


4

II.668.4ff. (II.212). “But the mode in which they are really
objectionable &c &c . . . The rate of interest is [not] prevented from
rising.” I do not follow this reasoning: it seems to me the effect on
the rate [of] interest wd be the same in either case. What really
happens, and happens alike in bo[th] cases, is this:—a certain amt of
circulating medium formerly existing in the state of mo[ney(?)]
disposable on loan is withdrawn from this state and employed in
circulating commo[—] Supposing the bank to make the loan out of actual
funds lodged with it, the lending abili[ty(?)] of the bank and of the
country is diminished by so much, and a certain portion of [—] demand
for purchasing or paying power is satisfied: supposing the depositors to
draw the funds out themselves, an equal encroachment is made on the loan
fund of the bank and of the country, and an equal portion of the demand
for loans is satisfied. I cannot see that either the demand or the
supply of money on loan wd be affected by the mode in which this
result—the same in each case—was brought about; nor therefore why, one
course shd affect the rate of interest more than Edition: current; Page:
[1071] the other. In practice I believe there wd be a difference;
because I believe that in practice the bank wd make the loan not out of
funds actually in its possession, but out of its general credit in the
way indicated above. Made in this way the rate of interest wd not be
affected in the same degree as if made in the other; but why? because a
refusal to [discount(?)] by the bank wd be a refusal to extend its
credit further: it wd therefore be equivalent to a curtailment effected
in the available loan fund of the country.

Supposing I am right in the view above advanced I think it must be
admitted that the considerations urged attenuate indefinitely, if they
do not entirely remove, the force of the concession made to the
supporters of the Act on pp. 213-14 [II.670.12ff.]. “I am compelled to
think that the being restricted from increasing their issues is a real
impediment” &c. . . . If the restrictions of the Act of 1844 were no
obstacle to the advances of the banks in the interval preceding the
crisis, why were they found an insuperable obstacle during the crisis”?
I answer, because in the former period a credit with the Bank—to be used
by means of cheques and not involving any important increase of
issue—answered the purpose of those who borrowed; whereas in the latter
period—owing to the extensive collapse in the mean time in the ordinary
media of circulation—actual notes were required. See the quotation from
Fullarton p. 216. [II.671.17ff.] [Altered; see II.668q-q and r-r, and
670y-y.]


5

II.678 (II.225). “Every drain for exportation. . . . . is now
compulsorily drawn from that source alone—the bank-note circulation.”
[II.678o-o.] This I think is only true when we include as part of the
“circulation” the notes or gold held in the banking department of the
bank, as well as other “reserves” existing through the country; but
these “reserves” are not “circulation” in the sense in which the word is
used by Mr Fullarton in the passages previously quoted. In those
passages the word “circulation” is restricted to “that portion of the
metallic wealth of the nation which really circulates” (224
[II.677.7-8]), as distinguished from “the hoards”, or stagnant metallic
wealth only to be called into activity by the attraction of a high rate
of interest. Restrict the term “circulation” equally in its application
to our monetary system, and it is not true that every drain for
exportation is drawn from “the bank-note circulation”. As you point out
in the next paragraph “the first operation (and I venture to add not
merely the first but almost the entire operation) of the drain is on the
banking department, “the deposits” in [sic] which, as you add,
“constitute the bulk of the unemployed and disposable capital of the
country.” The drain therefore does not fall on the “circulation” in
Fullarton’s sense of that word. The true analogue in our system for the
hoards which exist under a metallic currency are clearly I think the
bank reserves, or more generally lendable money wherever it is to be
found. The objection to the Act of ’44, it seems to me, is, not that it
throws a drain upon a part of the currency on which it wd not fall under
a metallic system, but that it curtails the dimensions of the available
reserve: this it does by the separation of departments; the effect of
which is to lock up in the Issue department a vast quantity of gold
which really answers no practical purpose whatever. In the passage (p.
224 [II.677.24]) beginning “In a country &c . . . [sic] the word
“reserve” of the Bank of England seems [to be(?)] used to cover the gold
in both departments. Reasoning on the principles of the Act I do not
[think(?)] this use of “reserve” is justifiable. The gold in the Issue
department Edition: current; Page: [1072] wd not I think be regarded by
those who framed the Act, as “reserve”, but as “circulation”—the notes
actually circulating being mere tickets representing it. [Altered; see
II.678o-o.]

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

12 Dec., 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

7.


MILL TO CAIRNES

Saint Véran, Avignon

12 Dec., 1864

.

I do not know how sufficiently to thank you for all you have done for
me. That you should have taken the trouble to write out your thoughts so
fully on so many points, only for my use, is a favour such as I should
never have presumed to ask from you. It is like nothing but the
philosophic correspondences in which the thinkers of the 16th and 17th
centuries used to compare notes and discuss each other’s opinions before
or after publication—of which we have so many interesting specimens in
the published works of Descartes. I shall keep the notes carefully and
return them to you, for I do not like that so much thought, so clearly
worked out on paper, should have no reader but me: besides, it enables
me with a better conscience to use their contents.

On most of the minor points I think you are right, and shall profit by
your suggestions. On Ireland I shall cancel all I had newly written on
that subject, and wait for the further communication you kindly
promise.31 On the few points of doctrine on which our opinions differ,
you have not, thus far, convinced me, though you have taught me much.
Among these I do not count the theory of the rate of interest, for I
agree entirely with your explanation of the phenomena, and the article
in the North British Review appears to me excellent. I had, even before
I heard from you, inserted a passage pointing out how the new gold, as
long as it continues to flow in, must tend to keep down the rate of
interest [II.651f-f652]. We differ, I believe, only on a question of
nomenclature, and at present it seems to me that the objections to your
phraseology are stronger than to mine. But I have not done thinking on
the subject, and I shall in any case have to modify several expressions,
if nothing more.

In the matter of the operation of duties on international values, I see
that I have omitted one of the elements of the question, viz. the
competing demands of other commodities on the purse of the consumer; but
it does not seem to me that this omission materially affects the
conclusion. Suppose that I have a given sum, say £10 a year, the
expenditure of which I am determined, whatever happens, to divide
between two commodities, A and B. I conceive that even then, if A rises
in price and B falls, the effect in the average of cases will be that I
shall buy more of B and less of A.

On the Wakefield system I scarcely understand your argument. In the
supposed case of the settlers, and in every other, I apprehend the
separation of employments to be a real cause and indispensable condition
of a larger production. It is true that territorial separation of
employments, by international trade, often suffices: but the main
justification of Wakefield’s system is, that this trade does not take
effect when families settle, each of them many miles from its next
neighbour in the wilderness.

Edition: current; Page: [1073]
The point on which we seem to differ most, & to be least likely to come
to an agreement, is the income tax. You think it fair to take from
different people in a single year, an equal percentage of what their
incomes, whether permanent or temporary, would sell for in that year:
because (you say) the payment in each year should be compared with what
the income is worth in that year to its owner. In this I agree; but I
answer, that the income is, in that year, worth to him its capitalized
value only on the supposition that he actually capitalizes it, and
spends the whole value within the year. Then, indeed, he will have been
fairly taxed: but then, he will not have to pay the tax in any future
year, for the income will have passed into other hands. On any other
supposition the income is only worth to him its capitalized value spread
over the whole of its duration, that is, in each year the total amount
divided by the number of years. I agree in what you say about equality
of sacrifice, but in estimating this, I only exclude necessaries. I do
not think a distinction can be fairly made between comforts and
luxuries, or that I am entitled to call my tea and coffee by the one
name, and another person’s melons and champagne by the other. I allow
for nothing but what is needed to keep an average person alive and free
from physical suffering.

I have read with the greatest interest Judge Longfield’s address, and
two of your articles on it in the Daily News.32 There may be others
which I have missed, as the paper is often stopped at the French post
office. Though I thought the Judge wrong in much of what he said on
fixity of tenure, I agreed with, I think, every part of his address
which was praised in your articles, and I think it altogether a most
important paper. I give him the greatest credit for speaking out so
plainly, and so much to the purpose. It is particularly timely, coming
so soon after the speech in which Gladstone included remedial measures
for Ireland among the things which he put in the front of his policy.33
We see there, as usual in Gladstone, the man who speaks from his own
convictions, and not from external influences. No other minister would
have put forward Ireland, any more than Reform, just at this time, when
there is no public outcry about it.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

20 Dec., 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

8.


MILL TO CAIRNES

Saint Véran, Avignon

20 Dec., 1864

.

I wrote to you some days ago a letter addressed Dublin and “to be
forwarded”, thanking you for the two packets of notes you kindly sent
and remarking generally on their purport. I have since carefully revised
all the passages you referred to, and there are very few of the notes by
which I have not, to some extent, profited. In a great many cases I have
entirely adopted your view. I have rewritten the fourth section of the
chapter on the Rate of Interest and Edition: current; Page: [1074] have
much enlarged it [II.653-8]; completing my exposition of the causes on
which the rate of interest depends, by adopting nearly all you have said
on the subject that involves doctrine. In what merely involves the mode
of stating the theory, I still prefer my own: but I see that the whole
truth of the subject may be expressed in either way, and may usefully be
so in both. Your remarks on the definition of money I have not used, for
a different reason: I cannot, in conscience, take without necessity what
belongs to you. When it is for the correction of an error I have less
scruple, but all I have said on this matter tended to your opinion,
though less thorough and conclusive. Even on the Interest question, I
should like, if you will permit me, to acknowledge my obligations to you
in a note.

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

23 Dec., 1864

74 Lower Mount St. (Dublin)

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9.


CAIRNES TO MILL

74 Lower Mount St. (Dublin)

23 Dec., 1864

.

I have received both your letters—that of the 20th inst. this day—which
have caused me, I needly not say, very sincere gratification. That you
should have modified your book in any degree in deference to suggestions
of mine is a compliment which I shall never cease to prize, coming as it
does from one to whom I lie under the deepest intellectual obligations.
It brings me the comforting assurance that I have so appropriated your
principles and methods that I can now apply them for myself. I shall not
affect to deny that I shall be proud of any reference you may make to me
in your work; but be assured that whatever I have done (and in truth you
very greatly overrate this) has been a labour of love, for which I have
thought of no other acknowledgment than its being received and
considered by you.

I must apologize for the delay which I have allowed to elapse in
forwarding you the results of my inquiries into the state of Ireland.
You will accept my assurance that it has been quite unavoidable. I have
now got on paper, and hope to forward you by next post [sic], the most
material items of such information as I have been able to obtain. So far
as the facts go, I think you may accept them as trustworthy. When not
taken from official documents or from my own experience they are given
on the authority of informants in whom I have every confidence, of whom
the principal have been Judge Longfield, Mr Thom (of Thom’s Almanack)34
and Mr Jonathan Pim35—the last a merchant of this city connected with
the Quaker body & author of a very good book on Ireland which, together
with another in the compiling of which he took part, he has (as you will
see by his letter which I enclose) requested me to forward to you. I
have also had the advantage of conversing much with an intimate friend,
Mr McDonnell,36 Examiner in Judge L’s Court, Edition: current; Page:
[1075] than whom I dont know any one more thoroughly familiar with the
present state of land tenure in Ireland or more anxious to impart his
knowledge truthfully. A good deal of what I send is in the nature of
speculation, and of the value of this you will judge yourself.

I have read with great interest what you have said on my criticisms, but
before replying to this part of your letter, I prefer to wait till I
have time to consider some of the points you have urged more carefully
than since the receipt of your letter I have had time to do.


Notes on the State of Ireland (1864) for J.S.M.37

That cottierism has undergone an extensive reduction in Ireland is quite
beyond question. The fact is conclusively indicated in the statistics of
holdings quoted at p. 18 of the article sent herewith.38 The causes
which have brought about this reduction are numerous and powerful, and
are still in active operation. At the head of these I would place free
trade. The cottier class, on the scale on which it has been known in
modern Irish history, had its origin in the transition of Ireland from a
grazing to a corn-producing country, which occurred in the latter half
of the 18th century: the phenomenon was connected with the same group of
causes under the influence of which England from being an exporter
became an importer of grain: and the cottiers have always been
identified with the system of agriculture under which they arose. Free
trade has effectually shattered, and already in great part overthrown,
that system, by throwing the country upon its special capabilities which
(speaking generally) are pastoral. It is curious to note how exactly the
process which was in operation a century ago is now being reversed.
Tillage was then rapidly taking the place of pasture; the labourers
employed in this conversion being paid (in the absence of circulating
capital) in land. At the commencement of the movement, which we may date
at 1754, the population of Ireland, which for quarter [sic] of a century
had scarcely moved, having been 2,309,000 in 1726, was 2,372,634
Edition: current; Page: [1076] persons: by 1788 it was upwards of
4,000,000; in 1805 it was 5,395,456.* Now a contrary impulse is causing
tillage to give way to pasture: the labour† of the cottiers is every
year less and less required; on the other hand the land which they hold
can be turned to good account in grass. The circulating capital which
came into existence a century ago contemporaneously with the cottier
system is now going back into the fixed form; and with the decline in
the country’s circulating capital, the population is also declining.
Free trade, it must be confessed, has been injurious to Ireland if the
maintenance of an immense agricultural population in the condition of
the cottiers was a good.

I have placed free trade at the head of the causes tending to the
reduction of cottierism, because I think that it is the fundamental
agency in the movement, and would even alone have led sooner or later to
this result. Of course the tendency thus developed was immensely
accelerated by the famine: it has also been aided by other
causes:—Amongst these the principal are the lesson of experience; the
universal breakdown of the system in 1847 has shown landlords that the
system is as ruinous to them as it is demoralizing to the peasantry; 2.
the commercial ideas infused into agricultural society through the
medium of the new men who have purchased land in the Encumbered and
Landed Estates Court. Land is every day coming more and more to be
looked at in the light of an investment; and from this point of view
cottiers are an abomination. Lastly, the increased facilities of
intercourse and communication with America and other new countries have
opened the door of escape to the superfluous population, and allowed the
movement to go forward at a rate which without this wd be impossible. It
may be too much to say that cottierism is tending towards entire
extinction; but I think there need be no hesitation in saying that the
dimensions of the phenomenon will soon be so reduced that it will cease
to be important.

What is the state of things that is taking its place? This is indicated
by the statistics already referred to. The farms between 15 and 30 acres
and those above 30, have increased pari passu with the diminution of
those below 15 acres. The usual course of proceeding is much as
follows:—A landlord finds his estate encumbered with a number of small
cottiers holding from 1 to 9 or 10 acres. He has no occasion for their
services as labourers; for he finds he can turn what land he farms
himself to better account in grass; nor for the same reason can they
procure employment from the larger farmers in the neighbourhood. For any
other purpose than that of mere labourers they are utterly unfit: they
are ignorant unenterprising and generally largely in arrear of rent.
Improvement of his estate, or the rendering of it profitable in any way,
is manifestly impossible while they are on it. He comes to the most
hopeless amongst them, urges them to give up the land, offers to remit
all arrears of rent, suggests emigration, and occasionally offers to
contribute something towards the expenses of the journey. While this is
going forward those poor Edition: current; Page: [1077] people are
probably plied at the same time with invitations from their friends on
the other side of the Atlantic to join them; their invitations being
seconded by remittances to pay their passage money out. Then the
movement once set on foot is contagious. The cottiers are thus rapidly
passing away, and the landlord, once rid of them, will not be anxious to
submit his back again to the burden. He will proceed to consolidate
several of the small holdings, and, according to circumstances, will
either take the land into his own hands, or look out for a solvent
tenant of some substance to whom he can let the whole: very frequently
the plan adopted is to add the land thus liberated to the holdings of
the most promising of the existing tenants.*

I have referred above to the beneficial influence exercised on land
tenure in Ireland through the commercial ideas of the new proprietory:
it must be confessed that this agency is not without its drawbacks.41 A
class of men, not very numerous, but sufficiently so to do much
mischief, have through the Landed Estates Court, got into possession of
land in Ireland who of all classes are least likely to recognize the
duties of a landlords position. These are small traders in towns, who by
dint of sheer parsimony frequently combined with money lending at
usurious rates have succeeded in the course of a long life in scraping
together as much money as will enable them to buy 50 or 100 acres of
land. These people never think of turning farmers, but proud of their
position as landlords, proceed to turn it to the utmost account. An
instance of this kind came under my notice lately in the neighbourhood
of Drogheda. The tenants on the property were at the time of the
purchase, some 12 years ago, in a tolerably comfortable state. Within
that period their rent has been raised three several times; and it is
now, as I was informed last night by the priest of the district, nearly
double its amount at the commencement of the present proprietor’s reign.
The result is that the people who were formerly in tolerable comfort,
are now reduced to poverty: two of them have left the property and
squatted near an adjacent turf bog where they exist trusting for support
to occasional jobs. In the end, if this man is not shot, he will injure
himself through the deterioration of his property, but meantime he has
been getting 8 or 10 per cent on his purchase money. This is by no means
a rare case. The worst evil is that the scandal which such occurrences
cause casts its reflection on transactions of a wholly different &
perfectly legitimate kind, such as I have described above, where the
removal of the tenants is simply an act of mercy for all parties.

Edition: current; Page: [1078]
I have indicated above the causes which are conducing to the decline of
cottierism. Simultaneously with the movement thus induced, there is an
opposite process going on. The anxiety of landlords to get rid of
cottiers is to some extent neutralized by the anxiety of middlemen to
get them. To understand this it should be remembered that about one
fourth of the whole land of Ireland is held under long leases; the rent
reserved, where the lease is of long standing, being generally greatly
under the real value of the land. It rarely happens that the land thus
held is cultivated by the owner of the lease: instead of this he sublets
it at a rack rent to small men, and lives on the excess of the rent
which he receives over that which he pays. These leases are constantly
running out; and as they draw towards their close, the middleman has no
other interest in the land than at any cost of permanent deterioration
to get the utmost out of it during the unexpired period of the term. In
this purpose the small cottier tenants precisely answer his turn.
Middlemen in this position are as anxious to obtain cottiers as tenants
as the landlords are to be rid of them; and the result is a transfer of
this sort of tenant from one class of estates to the other. The movement
is of limited dimensions, but it does exist, and so far as it exists,
neutralizes the general tendencies. Perhaps it will here occur that this
system will reproduce itself; that the same motives which led to the
existence of middlemen will perpetuate the class; but there is no danger
of this. Landowners are now perfectly alive to the ruinous consequences
of this system however convenient for a time; and a clause against
subletting is now becoming a matter of course in every lease.

We see then that the cottier class are rapidly diminishing in Ireland,
absorbed chiefly in the emigration; not however altogether: to some
extent they pass into the position of ordinary labourers. So far as the
latter lot has been theirs, I do not believe that any sensible
improvement has been effected in their condition. For a time their wages
may rise under the influence of a good harvest and the drain of
population to America: in the last 20 years the rates at large over the
country have probably risen from 20 to 40 or 50 per cent; but this mode
of stating the case is I believe misleading; the improvement in real
wages not at all corresponding to this nominal rise. Potatoes, which was
almost their sole subsistence in former years, and is still their main
subsistence, have in recent times sold at 2 or 3 or 4 times their former
price. In this year potatoes are exceptionally low, but are probably
twice their price as it stood 20 years ago, or nearly so. The 4d or 6d a
day which in remote parts of the country was a common rate of wage
twenty years ago cd not now by any means subsist a man. Money wages,
therefore, have necessarily risen: I dare say too that on the whole
looking at the lowered prices of tea sugar and clothing during the time
in question, real wages have risen; but I see no indications in any
direction of an advance in the standard of comfort. In the part of the
country that I know best—the Co. Meath & more especially the
neighbourhood of Drogheda—the ordinary course of things is for men to
marry at the age of three or four and twenty, often earlier, the women
being somewhat younger, and their joint wage frequently not exceeding
1s/6d a day, rarely exceeding 2s/6d. A man of good character earning
2s/6d a day is thought to be a catch. Any hope of permanent improvement
therefore by the conversion of cottiers into labourers I regard as quite
chimerical.*

Edition: current; Page: [1079]
The cottier class, as the statistics of holdings show are giving place
in a large degree to the class of farmers immediately above them—those
holding from 15 to 30 or 40 acres. What are the prospects of improvement
amongst these? One cannot represent them as very hopeful: still the
horison in this direction is not altogether dark. One fact is
noteworthy. Within the last 20 years a very large increase has taken
place in the private balances and deposits in the banks of the country.
In 1840 the aggregate of these moneys was, on the last day of the year,
£5,568,000: in 1862 it had risen to £14,389,000: it is probably now more
than three times its amount at the former date. During this period the
deposits in savings banks, after falling at the time of the famine from
nearly three to little over one million, have on the whole undergone
little change: In 1861 they stood almost exactly at the same amount as
in 1841. With regard to the former item—the deposits in banks—there
seems good reason for believing that the increase is mainly due to the
accumulations of the small farmers. The banks in which the increase has
been most marked are, as I have been informed by Mr. Jon. Pim, the
Provincial and National banks, which are also the banks of which the
branches in the rural districts are most numerous. Now it is not likely
that these accumulations wd come from the larger class of farmers—the so
called “gentlemen-farmers”:—these, when they have made money, look out
for investments of a different kind—as railways mining speculations and
stocks of various kinds: on the other hand the rural traders, accustomed
to larger profits, wd be dissatisfied with the low rate of interest
allowed by the banks. The small farmer class is the only one whose ideas
on the subject of pecuniary return are so limited and moderate as to be
content with this sort of investment. For the most part they look upon
the bank as the only alternative to the thatch.

The last remark will suggest a qualification of the inference which wd
at first view suggest itself on contemplating the statistics just
quoted. A good part of the ten millions added in the last fourteen years
to the aggregate of bank deposits has been undoubtedly merely
transferred from hoards—the form which the savings of the same class
formerly assumed; and this process is still going on. A priest—the same
to whom I have referred as my informant on another point—told me that,
only a few months ago, he received 600 sovereigns from a small farmer to
be lodged in a bank at Drogheda: these had all been concealed in the
thatch of his cottage—the sum of the savings of a life time.
Nevertheless, making all due allowance for accessions from this source,
a considerable portion of the ten millions of new deposits will
doubtless represent new accumulations. We are justified therefore in
concluding, notwithstanding the symptoms of poverty that still
everywhere abound, that wealth is growing among this class.

And here the question occurs, why with agriculture in its present
backward state, do not these people invest their savings in the most
obvious way—the improvement of their farms? The tenant-righter has a
reply at hand—want of security. But, plausible as this solution is, it
may be met by a practical answer. It is an unquestionable fact that many
of the worst cultivated farms in the country are held under long and
profitable leases; it is a common Edition: current; Page: [1080] saying
amongst country people—such a man can “afford” to farm badly—i.e. even
below the low standard which generally prevails. Further, though it is
probably true that in the Northern districts where “tenant-right”
prevails, cultivation is on the whole somewhat better than in other
parts of the country, the superiority after all is not very great;
while, such as it is, it may be sufficiently accounted for by the
superior energy which generally characterises the people in the Northern
part of the island. This view of the case is confirmed by what I am told
is an admitted fact—admitted even by R. Catholic landlords—that
Protestants form the best tenants, and are invariably preferred. In
dealing with the case I think we should distinguish between proximate
and ultimate causes. Proximately I think it is beyond question that the
bad state of cultivation is to be referred to the low industrial morale
of the farming population. With the vast majority the one idea of
farming which prevails is to take as much as they can out of the land
and to put as little as they can into it. The notion of considerable
outlay with a view to improvement of a permanent kind, whatever be the
interest of the cultivator in the land, hardly occurs to an Irish
farmer. But I think it is not the less true that this low conception of
the farmer’s functions—this fear to cast his bread upon the waters—is
the result of causes among which insecurity of tenure holds a prominent
place. Insecurity of tenure has long been and is still the rule in
Ireland; and the state of feeling generated under this condition of
things, has not only, as frequently happens, in a great degree detached
itself from and become independent of its original cause, but has
influenced opinion far beyond the reach of its direct action. The
standard of farming which prevails generally becomes the standard for
the few who are placed under circumstances more favourable than those
which generally prevail. The conclusion to which I come is that the
remedy is to be sought in many directions. Security of tenure I regard
as an indispensable condition, and this I think an improved public
opinion in connexion with the reforms suggested by Judge Longfield wd
substantially accomplish;* but this should go hand in hand with general
and specific instruction. As regards instruction, the National Board
have attempted something in this direction: in 1862 altogether 134
agricultural school farms were in operation, of which 19 were school
farms of the first class under the exclusive control of the
Commissioners; but, so far as I can discover, the instruction imparted
in these schools has not yet reached the farming classes to any sensible
extent:† the function which these schools have hitherto performed has
been the training of stewards for the gentry, through whom it is
possible some knowledge may have trickled down to the classes beneath
Edition: current; Page: [1081] them. The means of instruction which has
hitherto been found most efficacious is that described in the “Irish
Landlords” letter in The Gardener’s Chronicle—a combination of example,
precept, and coercion. Another mode which has been tried, but not with
success, is the introduction of Irish & Scotch farmers on the lands
obtained from the emigrating cottiers. The want of local knowledge, both
of places and character, and the jealousy of the native population of
“foreigners” has generally succeeded in defeating experiments of this
kind.

In connexion with this part of the subject—the condition of the small
farmers in the rank above the cottiers—you will be curious to know what
is the prospect of a class of peasant proprietors arising in Ireland.
The prevailing opinion amongst those with whom I have conversed on the
subject is that there is no likelihood of this. This is Judge
Longfield’s opinion, who founds himself upon the following
considerations:—1. that, wherever in Ireland substantial interests exist
in land, the owner of such interests almost invariably sublets; 2—(and
this is plainly but another aspect of the fact just mentioned)—that the
natural disposition of the Irish people is careless improvident given to
dash and show—in a word the opposite in all respects of that mental type
which is the characteristic of peasant proprietors, and which seems to
be indispensable to the keeping up of peasant-properties; 3. that the
peasant-proprietor régime belongs to an early and primitive condition of
society, and may be expected to disappear before the influences
developed by the increase of intercourse amongst peoples, commercial
progress and other modern forces; and that therefore the introduction of
peasant proprietors wd be a movement antagonistic to strong modern
tendencies. These reasons do not seem to me to be conclusive: 1. The
disposition evidenced by the practice of subletting is only the natural
and inevitable consequence of former social and political
conditions—conditions which are now rapidly passing away. Landlords have
admittedly felt the force of this change, and are every day coming to
look at their estates less and less through the medium of feudal and
mediæval, and more and more through that of commercial and modern,
ideas. Why should not the same influences reach the classes below them,
and neutralize in them too the mere “landlord” passion? 2. No doubt the
Irish disposition is careless and improvident; but why are we to suppose
that these qualities are ineradicable? Has there not been quite enough
in the history of the country to account for them? And if they be
eradicable, what more effectual means of accomplishing their extirpation
than by bringing the Irish people under the influence of a system which
in every quarter of Europe among various races of men is found
invariably accompanied with exactly opposite traits of mind? Regarded
from this point of view, peasant proprietorship appears to me to be
exactly the specific for the prevailing Irish disease. With regard to
the third consideration adverted to above, it wd certainly seem, if we
confined our view to a few countries, as if the pursuits connected with
land moved in a sort of cycle, commencing with pastoral industry,
passing into agriculture carried on by peasant proprietors, and issuing
in the large farm system carried on by capitalist farmers, and in which
pasture wd in Ireland at least occupy a large place. Thornton has traced
this course of things in the case of the Jews, Greeks, Romans and
English.42 But there are patent facts which suggest the doubt whether
there be any thing normal or necessary in this sequence of affairs.
Peasant proprietorship exists extensively all over the Continent of
Edition: current; Page: [1082] Europe: in France its definitive
establishment and greatest extension have been directly connected with
the triumph and growth of democratical ideas—emphatically a modern
power. In the United States, industrially the most advanced country in
the world, the cultivators of the soil are I believe every where
throughout the free states its owners. I am not aware that in the more
advanced countries of Europe where peasant proprietorship exists, there
are any indications of a decline of this form of tenure. The greatly
higher prices obtained for land when sold in small than when sold in
large quantities seems, on the contrary, to point to a tendency towards
increased growth. I do not think therefore that experience wd warrant us
in assuming the existence of a law in social progress inconsistent with
the permanence (or at all events the maintenance for some generations)
of a peasant-proprietory system: indeed I should rather be inclined to
regard the tenor of affairs in England as an exception to the prevailing
order of democratic progress than as indicating the rule. But, however
this may be, the state of Ireland is so backward as compared with
countries which are now cultivated by peasant proprietors that, even
supposing the ultimate tendency was as is alleged, it might, and I
conceive would, still be good policy to encourage this system as a
transitional expedient to help Ireland forward in its course.

But leaving these general considerations, what are the prospects in the
actual state of things in Ireland of the land getting in any large
extent into the hands of the actual cultivators? To some, but I believe
to a very limited extent, this has been, or at least was, realized.43 On
the sale some eight or ten years ago of the Thomond, Portarlington, and
Kingston estates in the Encumbered Estates Court, it was observed that a
considerable number of occupying tenants purchased the fee of their
farms. I have no knowledge of the localities where these properties are
situated, and have not been able to obtain any information as to what
followed that proceeding—whether the purchasers continued to farm their
small properties, or under the mania of landlordism tried to escape from
their former mode of life. But there are other facts which have a
bearing on this question which I will mention here. In those parts of
the country where tenant-right prevails, the prices given for the good
will of a farm are enormous. The following figures, taken from the
Edition: current; Page: [1083] schedule of an estate in the
neighbourhood of Newry, now passing through the Landed Estates Court,
will give an idea, but a very inadequate one, of the prices which this
mere customary right generally fetches.

Statement showing the prices at which the tenant-right of certain farms
near Newry sold.

acres
rent
purchase money of tenant-right
Lot 1
23
£ 74
£ 33
2
24
77
240
3
13
39
110
4
14
34
85
5
10
33
172
6
5
13
75
7
8
26
130
8
11
33
130
9
2
5
5
110
£334
£980

The prices here represent on the whole about three years purchase of the
rental; but this, as I have said, wd give but an altogether inadequate
idea of that which is frequently, indeed of that which is ordinarily,
paid. The right being purely customary will vary in value with the
confidence generally reposed in the good faith of the landlord. In the
present instance circumstances have come to light in the course of the
proceedings connected with the sale of the estate which give reason to
believe that the confidence in this case was not high: consequently the
rates above given may be taken as considerably under those which
ordinarily prevail. Cases, as I am informed on the highest authority,
have in other parts of the country come to light, also in the Landed
Estates Court, in which the price given for the tenant right was equal
to that of the whole fee of the land. Now here is a very remarkable
fact, that people shd be found to give say 20 or 25 year’s purchase for
land which is still subject to a good round rent: why is it, it will be
asked, that they do not purchase land out and out for the same or a
slightly larger sum. I believe the true answer is that the cost of
transferring land in small parcels is even in the Landed Estates Court
very great, very great that is to say as compared with the purchase
money; while the good will of a farm may be transferred without any cost
at all. The cheapest conveyance that cd be drawn in the Landed Estates
Court wd, irrespective of stamp duties, cost £ 10, which wd represent a
year’s or two year’s purchase of a small peasant estate: a conveyance to
transfer a thousand acres might not cost more, and wd probably not cost
much more. This is the case of land sold in the Landed Estates Court,
where all expenses of investigating title are avoided: where those must
be incurred, of course the expense is wholly inconsistent with the
transfer of property in any but large lots.

The heavy expenses incident to the sale & purchase of land have thus
obviously the effect of placing an immense premium upon large dealings
in land; and while this is the state of the law, the experiment of
peasant proprietorship it is plain cannot fairly be tried. The facts,
however, which I have stated, show I think conclusively that there is no
obstacle to the introduction of this system in the disposition of the
people.

That the fortunes of Ireland must, at all events for a considerable
future, Edition: current; Page: [1084] turn upon her agriculture is
manifest on looking to the limited extent to which her other industries
have yet been carried. Taking manufacturing industry proper, including
cotton, woollen and worsted, flax, jute, silk,—the total number of
persons (i.e. of males & females, old & young—[sic] employed in all
these branches was in 1862 only 37,872. Of these 33,525 were employed in
Flax factories, situated almost exclusively in Ulster, and chiefly in
the counties of Antrim, Down and Armagh; 2,734 in Cotton factories (one
half of these—viz. 1,412 being employed in one factory in Waterford, and
the rest in the North); 1,039 in Woollen and Worsted factories; the
remainder being distributed among the Jute and Silk factories. The only
other industry of any moment is mining, and this is of moment rather for
the possibilities it may have in store, than for any results which it
has yet achieved. The following figures will give some idea of the
present state of mining industry in Ireland.* In 1861 the number of
collieries at work in Ireland were 46: these turned out altogether
123,070 tons of coal. Of iron almost nothing has been produced. Copper
in the same year (1861) was raised, chiefly in Cork and Waterford, to
the value of £132,535. Of lead ore in the same year 2,403 tons were
turned out, yielding 1,592 tons of metal. Lastly silver was raised,
chiefly in Wicklow, to the value of £14,575. So inconsiderable are the
results yet accomplished. As to the future all is conjecture &
speculation. I have not been able to obtain any opinion on the subject
on which I am disposed to place the least reliance; there being a
general disposition among those who know most of the matter to conceal
their knowledge.

Such, as nearly as I have been able to ascertain it, is our present
position. The direction in which we are moving seems to be indicated
with sufficient clearness. The figures already given show the large
reduction which had been effected in the cottier class up to 1861. I
have just learned from Mr. Thom that returns obtained within the last
year show that since that time, the movement has gone forward with an
accelerated pace. (A summary of these returns Mr Thom has promised to
send me, and I hope to be able to transmit them with these notes). The
emigration steadily increases. It nearly reached last year the figure of
90,000: this year it had up to October reached 90,000: there can be no
doubt that before the year closes it will have exceeded 100,000. This
has occurred in the face of the American civil war, and all the alarm
which has been excited about compulsory enlistment. There can be little
doubt that the effect of peace, whenever it comes, will be to swell
considerably the tide. In view of these facts I look for a further
considerable decrease in the population; this consummation seems to me
at once inevitable and desirable: it is the effect of all those causes
which are shortening the distance and facilitating the intercourse
between nations acting upon a country surcharged with population under
the influence of a bad economic and a worse moral and political system.
The new and best parts of the world have, for the first time in history,
been brought into practical competition with the old and exhausted
portions. The result, I think, must be, as I have said elsewhere, “a
greater dispersion and mixing of populations and a greater equalization
of the conditions of wealth. It will no longer be a few favoured and
conveniently situated spots on the earth’s surface, but the whole earth,
that will be turned to the purposes of man.”44

Edition: current; Page: [1085]
The same tendencies, which in the emigration exhibit themselves on a
cosmopolitan scale, are traceable also in the internal economy of the
country. Those portions of the country in which the natural advantages
are greatest are advancing, not merely relatively to, but in some degree
at the expense of, the less favoured parts. For example, Galway—the
place in the West with which I am best acquainted—has beyond all
question seriously retrograded within the last twenty years, and I think
is still going back. The population has greatly declined, and I have no
doubt the present reduced population is, man for man, poorer than the
larger population of former years. I will mention a few facts connected
with this town. When I first went to Galway some fifteen years
ago—1849—things at that time having greatly declined from their former
state under the shock of the famine—there were at work three
distilleries, three breweries, several large grain storing
establ[ishments,] several large corn mills, a paper manufactory, and I
am sure other industrial establishments which now escape my memory.
Every one of these has now either closed, or is carrying on a business
so diminished that its closing is only a question of time. There was at
this time an export trade in cattle, and previous to the famine there
had been a considerable export trade in grain, chiefly oats. Both these
branches of trade have wholly disappeared, and the sole seaward trade of
Galway at present is an import of coal, chiefly for unproductive
consumption; the return cargo being taken in ballast. Now this collapse
is the more remarkable, as on no town in Ireland has the outlay of
public money been so large as on Galway—this outlay occurring exactly
during the period of its decline. 1. The Queen’s College was built,
having been commenced about 1846. Besides the original outlay this has
entailed a permanent expenditure in the town from the residence there of
at the lowest computation some 200 persons of the better-off classes,
connected with the College, some of these being persons maintaining
domestic establishments on a considerable scale. 2. A very fine dry
dock, and, connected with this, a ship canal (connecting Lough Corrib
with the sea), both executed in the mostly [?] costly style, have been
made during the same time by the Board of Works—both for all practical
purposes as useless as the Irish round towers. 3. An extensive drainage
was carried out during the same time all round the shores of Lough
Corrib, also under the management of the Board of Works. Lastly (though
it is true the funds in this case did not come from the public revenue)
the Galway end of the Gt. Western Railway was made, in connexion with
which an enormous hotel was built at the Galway terminus, the largest I
believe in Ireland,—built in expectation of requirements which have
never come to pass. Yet in spite of such adventitious aids Galway has
retrograded. The causes are not far to seek. The grain export was the
creature of the monopoly of the English market secured under the
protective system. Free trade, followed by a succession of good harvests
between 1849 & 53 gave the coup de grace to the corn growing interest in
this part of the country. What free trade did for the export trade in
grain the railway has done for the export trade in cattle. The live
stock of all that part of the country westward of Roscommon which
formerly found a port at Galway or Limerick is now carried by the
railways to the Eastern coast. These two facts involved all the rest:
the small cottiers who were identified with the grain-growing régime
were the chief customers of the distilleries; the better class of
farmers who dealt in cattle, and the merchants and traders whom this
conflux of people supported, were the chief stays of the breweries. The
larger population, from all these causes, supplied the paper manufactory
with rags, for lack of which, I heard the other day, it was preparing to
close. Edition: current; Page: [1086] Galway is perhaps a palmary
instance, but it is only an instance of a very general tendency. At
Limerick, which I visited lately,—though things there are greatly
better, two or three large manufactories being now maintained there in a
flourishing condition—I heard also complaints of decay, and saw
evidences of it. For example, what was once a staple export from
Limerick—butter—is now all carried off to Cork by railway, from whence
it is shipped to England, and largely to Australia.

Contemporaneously, therefore, with the decline of population in Ireland,
I think there is going forward a redistribution of it—a redistribution
which will be effected in a large degree at the expense of those parts
of the country of which the natural advantages are least. This latter
circumstance should be borne in mind, as it will serve to explain a good
deal of what is conflicting in the accounts of the country.

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

25 Dec., 1864

74 Lower Mount St.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

10.


CAIRNES TO MILL

74 Lower Mount St.

25 Dec., 1864

.

In writing to you yesterday I omitted in my haste to refer to your
question respecting the rate of profit in the United States. I am sorry
to say I am not able as yet to give you any satisfactory information
upon this point. On receiving your letter I communicated with Mr.
Ashworth of Bolton45 with whom I occasionally correspond, and from
whom,—as he is a thoughtful man, with large experience in business, and
who has spent some time in the U. States on which he has also written a
book—I had great hopes I should have been able to obtain the information
I desired. I have had two letters from him on the subject: in the last
referring to this point, he writes as follows:—“Your inquiry relating to
the ordinary rate of mercantile profit in N. York and the other cities
of the U. States is difficult to answer:—indeed I do not find from all
the inquiries I have made that any definite answer can be given.” He
then proceeds to describe a method by which the risk in mercantile
transactions is provided against in N. York, which complicates in some
degree the question of profit, and concludes with the remark that “The
rates of profit on sale of goods and the fluctuations on the current
credit of the buyer admit of no general estimate.” Let me state that the
way I put the question was as to the rate of profit which a person about
to engage in a business would regard as “fair”; his conception of
“fairness” would of course be founded on his knowledge of what in that
business was ordinarily obtained.

I wrote also to Mr Moran of the U. States Legation46 on the subject, and
have had a reply to this effect. “At this time I have no documents
bearing upon the subject of the ordinary rate of mercantile &
manufacturing profits in the U.S., but I will write this week (his
letter is dated the 9th Dec.) to a friend at home for all the data he
may be able to furnish.” He adds “Nearly all the Edition: current; Page:
[1087] manufactories of N. England are Joint Stock Concerns, and reports
are furnished annually of their dividends. These I think I can get, &
they may be useful.” Supposing that in striking these dividends an
adequate reserve fund against risk is maintained, might they not be
taken to represent the net profit on manufacturing undertakings? and
would not railway reports give us the same element for this kind of
investment? Combining these with the returns of a few more industrial
departments, might we not obtain the average net profit on investments
of a permanent kind (which of course would be quite distinct from the
interest on mercantile bills?; and, this obtained, should we not have a
basis for comparing American with English profits? For gross profits
being made up of the reward to abstinence, indemnity for risk, & wages
of superintendence, we should by this process obtain the first quantity,
and the two latter—at all events the last—there would not be much
difficulty in ascertaining with approximate accuracy. But, without going
into a complicated calculation, if we know the net profit on a few of
the leading investments of capital, we might I fancy with sufficient
accuracy for your purposes, infer the rest. Supposing, for example, that
railway dividends were found to be on the whole the same for the U. S. &
England, I think it would be a sound inference that profits are higher
in the former country, since the wages of superintendance [sic], which
net profit does not cover are certainly higher, & the indemnity for risk
is I suppose not less. The information promised by Mr Moran may be
expected in about three weeks from this.

Having thought over your remarks in reply to my criticisms I may as well
say now what occurs to me on the points between us. You say—“Suppose I
have a given sum, £10 a year, the expenditure of which I am determined
whatever happens to divide between two commodities A & B, I conceive
that even then, if A rises in price and B falls, the effect in the
average of cases will be that I shall buy more of B and less of A. If
this position be sound I admit my point fails—at least to the extent of
the “more” and “less”. But I cannot think that it is sound. Substitute
for A & B, beer & tobacco. Suppose a man has £10 to spend on these
luxuries, & that after the transference of the tax from one commodity to
the other, his money will enable him to consume them in the same
quantities & in the same proportion as before, is it conceivable that he
will continue permanently to regulate the proportion of his smoking and
drinking not by his tastes—his means being by hypothesis sufficient—but
by the relative prices? I conceive that he might do so for a time under
the influence of association; but this influence would be constantly
diminishing, while his tastes & means would remain constant forces.

What I intended to say with reference to the Wakefield system was that
the forcible separation of employments was unnecessary, and for this
reason, that where the density of the population and the variety of
industrial skill and knowledge are such as to render expedient a
separation of employments, there a separation of employments will
naturally take place; it seems to me that the tendency of Wakefield’s
scheme for requiring a “sufficient-price” for land was to force on an
artificial separation of employments at the cost of these
conditions—density of population &c—under which alone separation of
employments is expedient or indeed permanently possible; his test of
“sufficiency” having reference, not to the satisfying of the
requirements of the colony (on which its attractiveness to emigrants
depends) but to the checking of the purchase of land. So far as this
latter end is obtained without full compensation in the increased
attractiveness of the colony, the effect must be to repel
immigration—i.e. Edition: current; Page: [1088] to prevent the
realization of the conditions in which the separation of employment
becomes expedient.

Lastly, with regard to the income tax question I do not think my
position was (or if it was I did not correctly state my ideas) that “the
payment in each year should be compared with what the income is worth in
that year to the owner”. My position is that the payment in each year
should be compared with what the payer is worth in that year; and that
the payer is worth, not merely his income—that portion of his wealth
which he allocates to current expenses, but also, that which he invests,
or allows to remain invested. The latter, no less than the former,
appears to me to be to the owner a real source of pecuniary power, as
well as of present enjoyment—that enjoyment which arises from the sense
of having provided against future contingencies. Were it not that you so
decidedly reject what I have said on this point, I should be inclined to
feel confident in it, and for this reason, that applying the principle,
subject to a deduction for necessaries, it would I imagine bring us to
precisely the same practical conclusion as your principle of “equality
of sacrifice”. With regard to this, I should not think of insisting on
the distinction between comfort & luxuries. In practice it could not
evidently be carried out, though I think something might be said for it
in speculation.

Pray do not think of troubling yourself by replying further to what I
have said: in the end I dare say my errors will find me out. I hope the
parcels sent yesterday & the day before will reach you safely.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

5 Jan., 1865

Saint Véran, Avignon

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

11.


MILL TO CAIRNES

Saint Véran, Avignon

5 Jan., 1865

.

I have been too long in acknowledging the receipt of the very
interesting things you last sent; but I was working against time on
another subject, and had unwillingly to put by your last notes unread
until this morning. I thank you most heartily for them. They are a
complete Essay on the state and prospects of Ireland, and are so
entirely satisfactory that they leave me nothing to think of except how
to make the most use of them. For my new edition I must confine myself
chiefly to the general results; but if I find it advantageous to
transcribe certain paragraphs entire, will you allow me to name their
real author? The article is a valuable supplement to the notes. The
letter in the Gardener’s Chronicle I was already acquainted with, having
read it in I forget what newspaper.47 I beg you to offer my sincere
thanks to Mr Pim for the books he so kindly sent, which I shall
immediately read. His letter, inclosed [sic] in yours, is full of good
sense.

Respecting the rate of profits in the United States, we must hope to
learn something through the kind offices of Mr Moran. But it is, I
imagine, very difficult to ascertain the real average rate of profit, or
expectation of profit, in any country. It would, however, be something
to have an answer to the more vague question, whether, in the opinion of
Mr Ashworth, or other persons to Edition: current; Page: [1089] whom
business in both countries is familiar, the profits of capital in the
United States are or are not, higher than in England.

Of the two or three points which we differ about, I will only touch upon
one—the influence of price on demand. You say, if a tax is taken off
beer and laid on tobacco in such a manner that the consumer can still,
at the same total cost as before, purchase his usual quantity of both,
his tastes being supposed unaltered, he will do so. Does not this assume
that his taste for each is a fixed quantity? or at all events that his
comparative desire for the two is not affected by their comparative
prices. But I apprehend the case to be otherwise. Very often the
consumer cannot afford to have as much as he would like of either: and
if so, the ratio in which he will share his demand between the two may
depend very much on their price. If beer grows cheaper and tobacco
dearer, he will be able to increase his beer more, by a smaller
sacrifice of his tobacco, than he could have done at the previous
prices: and in such circumstances it is surely probable that some will
do so. His apportionment of self-denial between his two tastes is likely
to be modified, when the obstacle that confined them is in the one case
brought nearer, in the other thrown farther off.

I take Macmillan, and was much interested by your article,48 which makes
more distinct the idea I already had of the contract system in the
mining districts. Laing, in his Prize Essay, brought it forward many
years ago as an example of the cooperative principle.

I have had a visit here from a rather remarkable American, Mr Hazard, of
Peacetown, Rhode Island.49 Do you know him, or his writings? If not, I
shall have a good deal to tell you about him that will interest you.

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

9 Jan., 1865

74 Lower Mount St., Dublin

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

12.


CAIRNES TO MILL

74 Lower Mount St., Dublin

9 Jan., 1865

.

I am sincerely happy that you are pleased with my notes on the state of
Ireland. As I said before, I shall not affect to deny that I shall be
gratified by the appearance of my name on your pages wherever it may
occur; at the same time I should be sorry that you introduced it if
there were no other object for doing this but my gratification.

I will write to Mr. Ashworth putting the question respecting the rate of
profit in the U. States in the relative form in which you suggest.

Touching the taxation question, after weighing carefully what you say I
am still inclined to think that the position is substantially sound that
“a man’s comparative desire for two commodities is not affected by their
comparative Edition: current; Page: [1090] prices”. The animal
propensity towards beer and tobacco in certain proportions to each other
depends on physical conditions: I can conceive that these may be
overborne in some degree by the force of mental impressions; but then I
think the mental impressions depending for their force on the principle
of association are liable to become weak, while the force of the former
is a constant quantity. At all events we have, I think, brought the
question to a point at which it can only be decided by experiment,
which, next to agreement, is the most satisfactory issue of an economic
argument.

Mr. Hazard I am not acquainted with, or his writings, but I shall look
forward to learning something of both from you at your leisure.

It occurs to me to call your attention to that passage in your Political
Economy (I cannot this moment put my finger on it) in which you allow
that Protection may in a conceivable case be justifiable as a means of
helping manufacturing industry through its initial stage [II.918-19]. I
know you have expressed yourself very guardedly: still it would seem
that the concession is frequently turned to bad account. In a recent
letter from the Times’ Australian correspondent,50 the writer represents
the protectionist party there as founding themselves on your authority.
It occurs to me as questionable whether the theoretic value of the
admission is worth the practical evil which its perversion involves.

I intended in a former letter to have suggested to you the advisability
of adding an index to the new edition. I often myself feel the want of
one.

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

24 Jan., 1865

74 Lower Mount St., Dublin

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13.


CAIRNES TO MILL

74 Lower Mount St., Dublin

24 Jan., 1865

.

I received the enclosed from Mr. Moran two days ago, and have waited in
hopes of getting the further information he promises; but as it has not
yet arrived I think it better to forward you what has reached me. I have
also had a letter from Mr. Ashworth in which he says:—“I make no doubt
that the rate of profit upon commercial capital is greater in the United
States than it is in this country, and this may be inferred not only
from the higher rate of interest which prevails, but also from the
extent of mercantile losses by bad debts which require to be covered by
compensating profits, and by the evidence afforded in the household
extravagance which prevails amongst the mercantile classes.” The
reasoning is somewhat shaky, but I send you the remarks for what they
are worth. He adds that he had, at the time of writing, written to an
“eminent merchant and manufacturer in Boston who has long been engaged
in business there, and has also resided 20 years in this country engaged
in trading pursuits,” and that he hoped in a month or six weeks to be
able to send me the opinion on the point in question of this gentleman.
You may depend on my forwarding it the moment it is received.

Edition: current; Page: [1091]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

4 Feb., 1865

Blackheath

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

14.


MILL TO CAIRNES

Blackheath

4 Feb., 1865

.

I have delayed answering your last letter, until I could at the same
time inform you of my return here.

The Political Economy has gone to press, considerably improved as I
think, and indebted to you for much of the improvement. I have availed
myself of your permission to acknowledge this in the preface, and also
in the chapter on the Irish question, a good deal of which I have given
in inverted commas as a communication from you. I have endeavoured to
correct the effect of the passage which has been used by Australian
protectionists, not by omitting it, but by giving a fuller expression of
my meaning [II.919-21]. The subject of an Index I had thought of, but
most Indexes of philosophical treatises are so badly and stupidly done,
that unless I could have made it myself or got it made by a political
economist, I thought it better let alone. An index is less wanted for a
systematic treatise than for a book of a miscellaneous character, as the
general arrangement of topics, aided by the analytical table of
contents, shews where to find the things most likely to be wanted.

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

5 Feb., 1865

74 Lower Mount St., Dublin

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

15.


CAIRNES TO MILL

74 Lower Mount St., Dublin

5 Feb., 1865

.

I have just received your letter informing me of your arrival in
England. I am not certain from it whether you received mine in which I
enclosed a communication from Mr. Moran (of the U. S. Legation) on the
subject of profits in the U. States, and also sent an extract from a
letter of Mr. Ashworth on the same subject. The opinion expressed by
both writers was not very definite, and probably would be late for the
purpose for which you desired it, but I may as well state that, in reply
to your question as to the relative state of manufacturing and
mercantile profits here and in the U. States, Mr. Ashworth expressed the
opinion that the rate in the U. States was decidedly higher than here.
The communication from Mr. Moran came from a correspondent in Chicago
who said that mercantile profits in that town & district had been very
high since the war had broken out—I forget the precise figures he named.
Mr. Moran promised further information as did also Mr. Ashworth. In a
letter since received from Mr. Ashworth he suggests Messrs Brown or
Messrs Rathbone of Liverpool51 as the persons in this country most
competent to give an opinion on the point in question. All this I expect
will be quite late for any practical purpose; but should you wish for
any further inquiries to be made I shall be happy to make them.

Edition: current; Page: [1092]
I am glad to hear that you have got the Political Economy to press. I
have already said how gratified I shall feel for your reference in it to
me, though I expect from what you tell me that it will not be without
some sense of shame at the disproportion of my slender services to your
acknowledgment.

What you say on the subject of an Index is quite true: it is no doubt
far better there should be none than a bad one. Were there time, and had
I a little more leisure than I am likely to have for the next two or
three months I should have been very happy to have undertaken it, could
you have entrusted it to me.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9 Feb., 1865

Blackheath

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

16.


MILL TO CAIRNES

Blackheath

9 Feb., 1865

.

As you supposed, your letter of Jan. 24 had not reached me when I last
wrote to you, but it has been sent from Avignon since. I am much obliged
to you for the trouble you have taken to get information respecting the
rate of profit in the U. States, but I fear it is next to impossible to
obtain any conclusive evidence on the subject. There is no more
difficult point to ascertain in the whole field of statistics. The
scientific question remains as great a puzzle to me as ever. Hitherto I
have left the passage of my Pol. Economy exactly as it was; but I shall
have to alter it more or less in the proof sheet.

I may perhaps get some light on the subject from Mr Hazard, (himself a
New England manufacturer of great experience) whom I shall see tomorrow.
I wish you had been already here, that I might have asked you to meet
him. He leaves for America on the 25th.

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

1 March, 1865

Galway

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

17.


CAIRNES TO MILL

Galway

1 March, 1865

.

I have just received the enclosed from Mr. Pim. I send it to you, as he
seems to wish that I should do so, though I do not expect that you will
derive much new light from his remarks, even if it should reach you in
time to enable you to turn it to practical account. Much of his
criticism appears to me to be irrelevant, and more to be answered by
reference to the date of the publication (for you will see that he
writes from the 3rd edition) some of his remarks indeed—as for example
his demand for an explanation of “cottier tenure”—would seem to argue
that he had read the book with but little attention. However I send you
his comments such as they have come to me.

Edition: current; Page: [1093]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

5 March, 1865

Blackheath

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

18.


MILL TO CAIRNES

Blackheath

5 March, 1865

.

Your two letters, with their inclosures, arrived in time; the former of
them only just in time. Mr. Pim’s remarks, as you anticipated, do not
change any of my opinions, but they have enabled me to correct one or
two inaccuracies, not so much of fact as of expression. On reading the
proofs of the new matter I have inserted respecting Ireland for most of
which I am indebted to you, and in which consequently your name is
mentioned, I feel unwilling that it should see the light without your
imprimatur. I have therefore taken the liberty of sending you by this
post the two sheets of which it forms a part, and I shall not have them
struck off until I hear from you that you do not object to anything they
contain. Any addition or improvement you may kindly suggest will be most
welcome.

The American information is very valuable, and I can hardly be thankful
enough to Mr Ashworth and to his Boston correspondent for the trouble
they have taken and the service they have done me. I beg you will convey
to Mr Ashworth my grateful acknowledgements. From their statements it is
clear that the ordinary notion of the extravagantly high rate of profit
in the U. States is an exaggeration, and there seems some doubt whether
the rate is at all higher than in England. But that does not resolve the
puzzle, as even equality of profits, in the face of the higher cost of
labour, indicated by higher money wages, is as paradoxical as
superiority. This is the scientific difficulty I mentioned, and I cannot
yet see my way through it. I have framed a question for the purpose of
bringing it before the P. Ec. Club, which will perhaps be discussed at
the April meeting & if not, at the July. I hope you may be present in
either case. You were greatly missed on Friday last. Had not I shone in
plumes borrowed from you, we should not have made much of it, and I
regretted your absence the more, as the Chancellor of the Exchequer52
was present, and spoke.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

11 March, 1865

Blackheath Park

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

19.


MILL TO CAIRNES

Blackheath Park

11 March, 1865

.

I thank you sincerely for your further favours in regard to my Political
Economy. I have sent your new matter to press, and have profited to the
full by your observations on what I had myself written. I am indebted to
you for nearly all which will give to that chapter of the book, any
present value.

Your solution of the difficulty as to American profits is perfectly
scientific, and was the one which had occurred to myself. As far as it
goes, I fully admit it; but my difficulty was, and still is, in
believing that there can be so great a difference between the cost of
obtaining the precious metals in America and in Edition: current; Page:
[1094] England, as to make the enormous difference which seems to exist
in money wages, consistent with a difference the contrary way in the
cost of labour. It is impossible to approfondir the subject in time for
the present edition. I have contented myself, therefore, with qualifying
the opinion I had previously expressed [I.414.20-1], so as to leave the
subject open for further inquiry.

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

13 March, 1865

Galway

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

20.


CAIRNES TO MILL

Galway

13 March, 1865

.

You very much overrate my small services in reference to the “Political
Economy”; but I should not easily exaggerate the satisfaction it has
given me to have rendered even these small services. Had I thought of
recompense, which I trust you will acquit me of, I have received it in
copious measure in the terms in which you speak of me in the portion of
your book of which you sent me the proof—terms of which I cannot help
saying that one epithet included in them appears to me so
disproportioned to its subject that, were the omission of this epithet
easily feasible, I could almost wish it made: as for the latter you
could have used none which I should have prized so highly. It is the
highest compliment I have ever received; but it is much more than a
compliment, it is a rich reward; and will be a powerful incentive. Pray
excuse my having said this much on what perhaps I had better not to have
referred to.

I see my observations on American wages and profits in their connexion
with the theory of profit did not hit the mark; and I fear I must now
relinquish the hope—I might say the ambition—of doing this, as on the
assumption that the exposition I gave was correct—which you concede to
me—I am unable to perceive where the difficulty lies: in short the
scientific problem seems to me to be solved. For the rest, it is (to my
apprehension) merely a matter of evidence whether money wages and
profits are, at one and the same time, so high as is alleged: if they
are—then the fact on the assumption that my exposition was correct is
conclusive, as it seems to me, that the difference between the cost of
obtaining the precious metals in America and in England is great enough
to produce the results which we see. Am I guilty of arrogance in
suspecting that the difference between us here—my inability to perceive
the difficulty of which you are sensible—is due to the greater
simplicity of the theory of profit through which I look at the
phenomena?—I refer to that mode of stating the doctrine—differing from
yours and Ricardo’s only in form—of which a sketch was contained in the
papers I sent you.53 Of course if the theory, thus stated, failed to
embrace any essential condition, this would be simply its condemnation;
but it appears to me to embrace all the conditions included in your
doctrine of “cost of labour”, and it renders the phenomena in the case
with which we are now concerned unless I deceive myself perfectly
intelligible. Might I ask as a favour, when you come to deal with this
question at your leisure, that you would consider once again that mode
of stating the theory.

Edition: current; Page: [1095]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

22 March, 1865

Blackheath

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

21.


MILL TO CAIRNES

Blackheath

22 March, 1865

.

I have again gone through your exposition of profits in the papers you
so kindly took the trouble of writing for me; and I think, as before,
that your mode of putting the doctrine is very good as one among others,
and that there is no difference of opinion between us. I still, however,
prefer my own mode of statement, for reasons which it would be long to
state, and which I have not time at present to reconsider from the
foundations. I am inclined to think that the real solution of the
difficulty, and the only one it admits of, has been given by myself in a
subsequent place, Book III, ch. xix, § 2 (vol. ii. p. 156 of the fifth
edition.) [II.620.]

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

27 March, 1865

3, Martello Terrace, Holywood, Belfast

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

22.


CAIRNES TO MILL

3, Martello Terrace, Holywood, Belfast

27 March, 1865

.

Thank you for looking over my note on profits again: I suppose it must
be that I overrate the importance of my form of stating the theory,
which indeed is in itself not unlikely—I have not a copy of the
“Political Economy” at hand, but will not neglect to look up the passage
you refer to.

John E. Cairnes

Cairnes, John E.

2 June, 1865

8 Duke St., St. James’s, S.W.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

23.


CAIRNES TO MILL

8 Duke St., St. James’s, S.W.

2 June, 1865

.

Accept my warm thanks for your kind letter. I had frequently lately
thought of writing to you, amongst other reasons to thank you for the
much prized present of your “Political Economy”—the second copy of that
work you have given me. . . .

Edition: current; Page: [1096]




