

ONLINE LIBRARY OF LIBERTY


A collection of scholarly works about individual liberty and free
markets. A project of Liberty Fund, Inc.



JOHN STUART MILL, _THE COLLECTED WORKS OF JOHN STUART MILL, VOLUME XVIII – ESSAYS ON POLITICS AND SOCIETY PART I (ON LIBERTY)_ [1977]


Edition used:

John Stuart Mill, _The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume XVIII
– Essays on Politics and Society Part I,_ ed. John M. Robson,
Introduction by Alexander Brady (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1977).
http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/233

About this Title:

Vol. 18 of the 33 vol. Collected Works contains a number of Mill’s
essays on politics, including his reviews of Tocqueville’s Democracy in
America and his book On Liberty.

Copyright information:

The online edition of the _Collected Works_ is published under licence
from the copyright holder, The University of Toronto Press. ©2006 The
University of Toronto Press. All rights reserved. No part of this
material may be reproduced in any form or medium without the permission
of The University of Toronto Press.

Fair use statement:

This material is put online to further the educational goals of Liberty
Fund, Inc. Unless otherwise stated in the Copyright Information section
above, this material may be used freely for educational and academic
purposes. It may not be used in any way for profit.

Table of Contents:

-   Contents
-   Introduction
-   Textual Introduction
-   USE AND ABUSE OF POLITICAL TERMS 1832
-   RATIONALE OF REPRESENTATION 1835
-   DE TOCQUEVILLE ON DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA [I] 1835
-   STATE OF SOCIETY IN AMERICA 1836
-   CIVILIZATION 1836
-   ESSAYS ON GOVERNMENT 1840
-   DE TOCQUEVILLE ON DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA [II] 1840
-   REFORM OF THE CIVIL SERVICE 1854
-   ON LIBERTY 1859
-   EDITOR’S NOTE
-   CHAPTER I: Introductory
-   CHAPTER II: Of the Liberty of Thought and Discussion
-   CHAPTER III: Of Individuality, as One of the Elements of Well-Being
-   CHAPTER IV: Of the Limits to the Authority of Society over the
    Individual
-   CHAPTER V: Applications

Edition: current; Page: [i]
COLLECTED WORKS OF JOHN STUART MILL

volume xviii

Edition: current; Page: [ii]
The Collected Edition of the works of John Stuart Mill has been planned
and is being directed by an editorial committee appointed from the
Faculty of Arts and Science of the University of Toronto, and from the
University of Toronto Press. The primary aim of the edition is to
present fully collated texts of those works which exist in a number of
versions, both printed and manuscript, and to provide accurate texts of
works previously unpublished or which have become relatively
inaccessible.

Editorial Committee

j. m. robson, General Editor

v. w. bladen, alexander brady, j. c. cairns, j. b. conacher d. p. dryer,
s. hollander, r. f. mcrae, f. e. l. priestley, marsh jeanneret, francess
halpenny, jean houston

Edition: current; Page: [iii]
Essays on Politics and Society

by JOHN STUART MILL

Editor of the Text J. M. ROBSON Professor of English Victoria College,
University of Toronto

Introduction by ALEXANDER BRADY Professor Emeritus of Political Economy
University of Toronto

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS

ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL

Edition: current; Page: [iv]
© University of Toronto Press 1977

Toronto and Buffalo

Printed in Canada

ISBN 0-8020-5345-9

LC 76-57079

London: Routledge & Kegan Paul

ISBN 0-7100-8451-X

This volume has been published with the assistance of a grant from the
Canada Council

This book has been published during the Sesquicentennial year of the
University of Toronto

Edition: current; Page: [v]


Contents

-   

    introduction, by Alexander Brady ix
-   

    textual introduction, by J. M. Robson lxxi
-   

    Use and Abuse of Political Terms 1
-   

    Rationale of Representation 15
-   

    De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [I] 47
-   

    State of Society in America 91
-   

    Civilization 117
-   

    Essays on Government 149
-   

    De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [II] 153
-   

    Reform of the Civil Service 205
-   

    On Liberty 213
    -   

        I Introductory, 217
    -   

        II Of the Liberty of Thought and Discussion, 228
    -   

        III Of Individuality, as One of the Elements of Well-Being, 260
    -   

        IV Of the Limits to the Authority of Society over the
        Individual, 276
    -   

        V Applications, 292

-   

    Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform 311
-   

    Recent Writers on Reform 341
-   

    Considerations on Representative Government 371
    -   

        Preface, 373
    -   

        I To What Extent Forms of Government are a Matter of Choice, 374
        Edition: current; Page: [vi]
    -   

        II The Criterion of a Good Form of Government, 383
    -   

        III That the Ideally Best Form of Government is Representative
        Government, 399
    -   

        IV Under What Social Conditions Representative Government is
        Inapplicable, 413
    -   

        V Of the Proper Functions of Representative Bodies, 422
    -   

        VI Of the Infirmities and Dangers to which Representative
        Government is Liable, 435
    -   

        VII Of True and False Democracy; Representation of All, and
        Representation of the Majority Only, 448
    -   

        VIII Of the Extension of the Suffrage, 467
    -   

        IX Should there be Two Stages of Election? 482
    -   

        X Of the Mode of Voting, 488
    -   

        XI Of the Duration of Parliaments, 501
    -   

        XII Ought Pledges to be Required from Members of Parliament? 504
    -   

        XIII Of a Second Chamber, 513
    -   

        XIV Of the Executive in a Representative Government, 520
    -   

        XV Of Local Representative Bodies, 534
    -   

        XVI Of Nationality, as Connected with Representative Government,
        546
    -   

        XVII Of Federal Representative Governments, 553
    -   

        XVIII Of the Government of Dependencies by a Free State, 562

-   

    Centralisation 579
-   

    appendices
    -   

        Appendix A. Taylor’s Statesman 617
    -   

        Appendix B. Appendix to Dissertations and Discussions, Vol. I
        648
    -   

        Appendix C. Jowett on Civil Service Examinations 654
    -   

        Appendix D. Substantive variants in the People’s Edition of On
        Liberty 657
    -   

        Appendix E. Substantive variants in the People’s Edition of
        Considerations on Representative Government 658 Edition:
        current; Page: [vii]
    -   

        Appendix F. Bibliographic Index of Persons and Works Cited in
        the Essays, with Variants and Notes 659

-   

    index 755

Edition: current; Page: [viii] Edition: current; Page: [ix]


Introduction

ALEXANDER BRADY

john stuart mill’s development as a political and social thinker may be
divided into at least three periods, with the first two largely
determining the course and character of the third. The first embraces
his youthful apprenticeship in and passionate proselytizing for the
utilitarianism in which from childhood he had been carefully nurtured by
his father and Bentham. His career as a young and orthodox utilitarian
extended to his mental crisis in 1826 at the age of twenty. The second
period began with his recovery from the crisis (1826-30) and terminated
with the dissolution of the Philosophic Radicals as a distinct party
towards the end of the 1830s. In this crucial period of his life Mill
refashioned his thinking under a variety of intellectual and emotional
influences. The final period comprised the remaining thirty-three years
of his career (1840-73), when he published his major works, including A
System of Logic, Principles of Political Economy, On Liberty, and
Considerations on Representative Government.


THE YOUNG UTILITARIAN

mill’s own account of his extraordinary education is a classic in the
intellectual history of the last century. This is not the place to
describe the rigorous pedagogic experiment to which he was subjected,
other than to note its apparent effectiveness in making him, as he
admitted, a reasoning machine with impressive powers for analysis and a
reverence for facts and principles. It was ostensibly designed by his
father to enable him to think for himself, although independent thought
was not its immediate result. The highly precocious boy who at sixteen
(in 1822) founded the Utilitarian Society had already faithfully
absorbed in his father’s study and from the writings and tutelage of
Bentham a philosophy of ethics and politics wherein utility was the
supreme criterion. He related how he felt as a youth after reading
Dumont’s translation of Bentham’s treatise on legislation: “When
Edition: current; Page: [x] I laid down the last volume of the Traité I
had become a different being. . . . I now had opinions; a creed, a
doctrine, a philosophy; in one among the best senses of the word, a
religion; the inculcation and diffusion of which could be made the
principal outward purpose of a life.”1

With obvious zealotry Mill was now ambitious to reform the affairs of
mankind to conform with utilitarian canons. Fired by the influence of
his father and Bentham, he engaged in a crusade to carry the torch of
rationalism and utilitarianism into every sector of British life. In
devotion he no less than Karl Marx had a sense of historic mission. His
obvious instrument was journalism, which in his opinion was to modern
Europe what political oratory had been to Athens and Rome. At seventeen
he began eagerly dashing off letters and articles to newspapers and
periodicals, arguing for the specific changes that utilitarians then
sought: civil and criminal law reform, population restriction, a free
press, a free economy, destruction of monopoly wherever present,
abolition of colonial slavery, parliamentary reform, and a redress of
Irish grievances. From the outset he wrote less to earn a living than to
fulfil a mission and convert a public. In 1823 his father had secured
his appointment as a clerk in the East India Company, where in the next
thirty-five years he rose to high office and enjoyed ample freedom and
adequate income to study and champion those causes to which he was
dedicated. His position in time gave him not merely an invaluable
independence but a practical experience in coping with complex human
situations in the sub-continent on the other side of the globe.

The empiricist here had a congenial opportunity to reinforce his
theories with a special experience of public affairs. In later life he
wrote:

the occupation accustomed me to see and hear the difficulties of every
course, and the means of obviating them, stated and discussed
deliberately, with a view to execution; it gave me opportunities of
perceiving when public measures, and other political facts, did not
produce the effects which had been expected of them, and from what
causes; above all it was valuable to me by making me, in this portion of
my activity, merely one wheel in a machine, the whole of which had to
work together. . . . I became practically conversant with the
difficulties of moving bodies of men, the necessities of compromise, the
art of sacrificing the non-essential to preserve the essential. I learnt
how to obtain the best I could, when I could not obtain everything. . .
.2

Two years after Mill founded the Utilitarian Society, Bentham and a few
friends launched the Westminster Review as an official organ for
utilitarian ideas. In its first four years (1824-28) Mill, despite his
youth, was a frequent contributor on a wide range of themes, which he
treated in the spirit of utilitarian orthodoxy. He criticized the
follies of aristocratic rule in Britain Edition: current; Page: [xi] and
Ireland, the illusions of chivalry formerly associated with aristocracy,
the vested interests of great landowners in corn and game laws, and the
ills of a faulty journalism. He strove to liberate the English press
from the trammels of an abused and arbitrary law of libel and the burden
of press duties.3 Mill like his father and other contemporary Radicals
saw in the freedom of the press the essential instrument for mobilizing
opinion, breaking down resistance to reform, and creating that degree of
popular discontent which would compel the aristocratic government to
make substantial concessions. He was naturally inspired by his father’s
famous essay on “Liberty of the Press,” first published in 1821 as a
supplement to the Encyclopaedia Britannica. He accepted his parent’s
uncompromising belief that no special laws should exist to hamper the
freedom of newspapers to print facts and advance opinions to protect the
people against the tyranny of a government.4

In 1826 when Mill was twenty he entered the shadows of a mental crisis,
which lasted for months, and has been variously assessed and explained
by biographers. It is easy to accept the traditional and simple view
that it resulted from prolonged and excessive work. Mill had recently
undertaken the prodigious task of editing the five volumes of Bentham’s
Rationale of Judicial Evidence, contributed to newspapers and journals,
debated in the societies with which he was associated, tutored his
brothers and sisters at home, and dealt with official duties at India
House. Yet there was more involved than heavy work and physical
exhaustion. In the Autobiography he blames a faulty education which
cultivated his intellect but starved his feelings and aesthetic
yearnings. His faith in the efficacy of utilitarian thought was
evidently shaken, and it is symptomatic that on this, unlike other
occasions, he failed to seek from his father guidance, sympathy, or
compassion. He had secretly begun to rebel against certain elements in
the philosophy of James Mill and Jeremy Bentham and felt compelled to
work out alone an intellectual accommodation with his inheritance. A. W.
Levi has advanced a Freudian explanation of the mental crisis and its
disappearance.5 Whether we accept this view or not, Mill’s illness
marked a milestone in his intellectual development. He awoke to
deficiencies in the eighteenth-century utilitarian thought in which he
had been indoctrinated, and to repair them sought guidance from other
and varied sources, including Edition: current; Page: [xii] a
constellation of new friends and new mentors. In the fourteen years
after 1826 the orthodox utilitarian was transformed into an eclectic
liberal who in no sense repudiated all his inheritance but modified and
combined it with many fresh ideas and methods of thought demanded in a
world gripped by change where truth, as he saw it, must be many-sided.

He found for depression an early antidote in Wordsworth’s tranquil and
contemplative poetry, which supplied something which had been lacking in
his father’s rigorous educational regime—a cultivation of feeling
inspired by natural beauty. Yet the Wordsworthian culture of the
feelings was at the time merely one of a medley of influences.6 Even
Macaulay’s caustic criticism in the Edinburgh Review of his father’s
Essay on Government persuaded Mill that although Macaulay himself was
faulty in philosophy, he scored valid points against the narrowness of
his father’s political thought and its neglect of significant springs in
the conduct of modern man.7

The thinkers, very different from his father and Bentham, who gave him
intellectual stimulus in the early 1830s were the Saint-Simonians,
Comte, Coleridge, Carlyle, and Tocqueville. He appreciated the fact that
these writers emphasized the significance of history and a philosophy of
history, and endorsed the idea that each state of society and the human
mind tended to produce that which succeeded it, with modifications
dictated by circumstances. At the same time, the whirl of change in
events and ideas impressed him with the relativity of political
institutions; each different stage in human society must have different
institutions. Further, as he put it, “government is always either in the
hands, or passing into the hands, of whatever is the strongest power in
society, and . . . what this power is, does not depend on institutions,
but institutions on it. . . .”8

Not the least fascinating circumstance in the shaping of Mill’s thought
in the early 1830’s was his coming under different streams of influence
and endeavouring to reconcile them or to select from each some element
or elements of significance. This process was admirably illustrated in
the letter to John Sterling in October 1831.9 He discussed here
contemporary Toryism and Liberalism, and distinguished between the
contrary types of speculative and practical Toryism, but oddly failed to
recognize the significant reformism of men like Huskisson and Peel.
“Practical Toryism,” he said, “simply means, being in, and availing
yourself of your comfortable position inside the vehicle without minding
the poor devils who are freezing outside. . . . Such Toryism is
essentially incompatible with any large and generous Edition: current;
Page: [xiii] aspirations. . . .” Yet this is the Toryism that appealed
to the privileged classes of his day, who had little faith in human
improvement, unlike his friends the speculative Tories—Wordsworth,
Coleridge, and Southey. These wanted an ideal Toryism, an ideal King,
Lords, and Commons, the old England as opposed to the new, an England as
she might be, not as she is. They represented a reverence for government
in the abstract,

sensible that it is good for man to be ruled; to submit both his body &
mind to the guidance of a higher intelligence & virtue. It is therefore
the direct antithesis of liberalism, which is for making every man his
own guide & sovereign master, & letting him think for himself & do
exactly as he judges best for himself, giving other men leave to
persuade him if they can by evidence, but forbidding him to give way to
authority; and still less allowing them to constrain him more than the
existence & tolerable security of every man’s person and property
renders indispensably necessary. It is difficult to conceive a more
thorough ignorance of man’s nature, & of what is necessary for his
happiness or what degree of happiness & virtue he is capable of
attaining than this system implies.10

These sentiments may seem somewhat uncharacteristic of one renowned as
spokesman of British nineteenth-century liberalism. They reflect his
thinking at a critical period when he was striving to assess the
changing winds of current opinion. At the same time they also reflect an
enduring element: his doubts about the average man’s capacity unaided to
cope wisely with the complex problems of citizenship.

In combining his earlier utilitarian doctrines with those of new
intellectual associates, Mill saw politics as an immensely important
part of the structure of society, since only through political activity
could men maximize their moral and social potentiality. The
institutional contrivances of the state, being interwoven with the main
facets of economic and social life, were comprehensible only in the
context of the whole. Politics reflected the character of economic and
social systems and the ethical values men held. Culture and politics
were thus inseparable, political progress and social progress
interdependent. Some years later, in a letter to John Chapman, Mill
expressed in general terms a view that for him had become axiomatic:

I understand by Sociology not a particular class of subjects included
within Politics, but a vast field including it—the whole field of
enquiry & speculation respecting human society & its arrangements, of
which the forms of government, & the principles of the conduct of
governments are but a part. And it seems to me impossible that even the
politics of the day can be discussed on principle, or with a view to
anything but the exigencies of the moment, unless by setting out from
definite opinions respecting social questions more fundamental than what
is commonly called politics.11

Edition: current; Page: [xiv]


IDEAS AND ACTIVITY, 1830-40

the varied intellectual stimuli that Mill experienced after his mental
crisis helped to shape the mould of his political thought in that
turbulent and confused era of the 1830s. However much he strayed from
the strict path of his father’s thought, he remained in agreement with
the main legal and political reforms sought by James Mill and the
Philosophic Radicals. In his journalism he still advocated extensive
changes in the laws, the parliamentary system, and the whole system of
government to reduce what, in his opinion, was the baneful influence of
the aristocracy on the major aspects of British society. He endeavoured
to arouse the Radicals in and out of parliament to form a powerful party
that either alone or allied with progressive Whigs could shape public
policies on reformist lines. In a letter to Edward Lytton Bulwer in
March 1838 he summarized his political ambitions in the preceding years:

I have never had any other notion of practical policy, since the
radicals were numerous enough to form a party, than that of resting on
the whole body of radical opinion, from the whig-radicals at one
extreme, to the more reasonable & practical of the working classes, &
the Benthamites, on the other. I have been trying ever since the reform
bill to stimulate, so far as I had an opportunity, all sections of the
parliamentary radicals to organize such a union & such a system of
policy. . . .12

Yet despite his genuine zeal, Mill found the task of trying to achieve
unity among the Radicals frustrating. They were splintered into stubborn
factions, and no parliamentary leader with the requisite qualities
emerged to unite them. They constituted a party of many lieutenants
without a general. For a short interval Mill pinned his hopes on Lord
Durham, who left the Whig ministry, undertook the Canadian mission,
surrounded himself with Radical advisers like Charles Buller and Gibbon
Wakefield, and produced a report that was a Radical rather than a Whig
or Tory document. But Mill’s hopes and designs for Durham’s leadership
or indeed for the future of the party were soon shattered by adverse
events, including the serious illness and death of Durham and Mill’s own
inability to sustain much longer the heavy financial and other burdens
of the London and Westminster Review, the organ for radical causes. By
1840 he had virtually ceased to be a leading counsellor to Radical
politicians, although his interest in utilitarian reform continued
unabated.

Significantly, in the 1830s Mill was not absorbed exclusively in British
political ideas and activities. In contrast with his father, who
disliked France Edition: current; Page: [xv] and the French, he was
early influenced by French thinkers and fascinated by the dialectic of
French politics. In 1829 he told a Parisian friend that he admired his
countrymen because they were open to ideas and more ready than the
English to act on them.13 Never perhaps was his Francophile enthusiasm
more pronounced than in 1830. On the collapse of the Bourbon monarchy he
hurried to Paris, mixed freely with young revolutionaries and
Saint-Simonian leaders, shared the excitement and joy of his French
friends in what they assumed was the triumph of revolution over
aristocratic politics and ultramontane theology, and returned to England
with a renewed zest for reforms.14

Mill’s political hopes for France resembled those for Britain: a
political regime on utilitarian lines, a widely representative assembly,
a liberal franchise, a free press, free associations, popular education,
and an enlightened public. However, the revolution of 1830 became a
dismal disappointment. The monarchy of Louis Philippe, wedded to narrow
commercial and financial groups, was unwilling to jeopardize for the
sake of reform its powers and privileges, and at every step opposed
major changes. From London Mill closely and anxiously followed events,
and between 1830 and 1834 in successive articles in the Examiner poured
out his bitterness.15

Mill’s severe disenchantment left an imprint on his political thinking
throughout the 1830s and even later. Although he did not lose liberal
convictions or a belief in representative government, he now doubted
that large electorates could make sound decisions without the positive
leadership of enlightened minorities. An extended suffrage, however
important in itself, alone could not prevent the continuance of
self-interested oligarchies whether of the aristocracy or middle class.
His doubts and fears at the time about representative institutions and
democracy were evident in numerous articles. Seven of these are included
in the present volume, beginning with the review articles on The Use and
Abuse of Some Political Terms by George Cornewall Lewis and Rationale of
Political Representation by Samuel Bailey.16


LEWIS AND BAILEY

Lewis was a man of Mill’s own age, equipped with similar precocious
erudition, and of utilitarian sympathies. His book dealt with the
relation of Edition: current; Page: [xvi] logic to politics, a topic in
which Mill was then too deeply interested to treat casually. Two years
later he confessed to Carlyle that his review was an outgrowth from his
own mind and the truest he had ever written—that is, it was no mere
product of an orthodox utilitarian schooling.17 He commended Lewis’s
attempt to bring a lucid logic into the language of politics, since
slovenly thinking and equivocal words were together the bane of
political discussion. But he took strong exception to certain points, of
which the most important concerned rights. Lewis, following his teacher
John Austin, argued that all rights are creations of law and the will of
the sovereign. To call anything a right which is not enforceable in the
courts is an abuse of language. In contrast Mill emphasized the reality
of moral rights. He contended that, in saying that no man has a moral
right to think as he pleases, for he ought to inform himself and think
justly, Dr. Johnson refers to a right Lewis evidently fails to
comprehend. Yet for Mill a right in the Johnsonian sense is no abuse of
terms; it is good logic and good English. Rights are the correlatives of
obligations and duties, and moral as well as legal rights have a
necessary and significant place in the contemporary state. It is a moral
right of subjects to be well-governed and a moral duty of the sovereign
to govern well. The focus of this criticism is the mischief inherent in
unduly simplified and inflexible concepts. Mill reacts here against the
rigidity of some utilitarian logicians. His further complaint concerned
the apparent and unjustified contempt with which Lewis disposed of Locke
and Rousseau for assuming an unhistorical and fictitious state of nature
and a social contract. Mill believed that it was inconsequential whether
anything like a state of nature existed. The real issue was the extent
to which as an hypothesis it shed light on the fact of a morality
outside the law to which men could appeal. To Mill as to Locke such
morality was important. Independent states in relations with one another
remained in a state of nature, without a common superior, but responsive
to moral obligations and duties. However unskilfully formulated, the old
theories of the social contract and the inalienable rights of man in
Mill’s opinion had a rightful place in the evolution of political
liberty and justice by indicating a pragmatic limit on the power of the
sovereign. He concluded his review of Lewis’s book by emphasizing the
necessity of recognizing, despite all the linguistic differences, the
close relationship between ideas of different political thinkers, and
also the possibility of combining them into a whole.

In reviewing Samuel Bailey’s Rationale of Political Representation, Mill
in effect summarized his own ideas on the subject. Sharing the views of
the Sheffield Radical, he employed the book to illustrate what for him
were the requisites of sound representative government. In his argument
he reverted Edition: current; Page: [xvii] to the cherished utilitarian
dogma of his father that in politics it was essential to achieve the
closest possible identification of interest between rulers and ruled.
But this, he thought, was feasible only if decisions were made, not by
the uninstructed multitude, but by a carefully selected body commanding
special knowledge and techniques and accountable to the public. Strict
accountability would help to ensure that rulers pursued the interests of
the people rather than their own. Admittedly the task of overcoming the
inbred chicanery and low cunning of politicians was difficult. It could
not be accomplished simply by institutional machinery without a massive
and prolonged public enlightenment. His fear of a sudden flood of new
and ignorant voters made him cautious about any rapid extension of the
franchise: “no one is disposed,” he wrote, “to deny that we ought
cautiously to feel our way, and watch well the consequences of each
extension of the suffrage before venturing upon another” (32). (This and
subsequent parenthetical references are to the text of the present
edition.) This caution extended even to his favourite cause of women’s
enfranchisement. Despite a passionate belief in female suffrage, he
thought in 1835 that its public advocacy would serve no practical
purpose (29n).

Although wary about changes in the franchise, Mill supported many
reforms in political machinery in harmony with orthodox Philosophic
Radicalism: the secret ballot, triennial parliaments, publicity for
parliamentary proceedings, payment of members and their
professionalization, reduction in the size of the House of Commons to
render it more efficient, and the creation of strong local government
which he assumed would reduce the burdens of the national parliament. He
also proposed a radical change in the House of Lords to destroy it as a
rigid barrier to reforms fashioned in the Commons. He would abolish its
hereditary principle and select its membership from the lower house. By
such changes he hoped to transform Britain’s government from an
aristocracy into a special kind of democracy led by an enlightened
few.18

He said little about the enlightened few beyond emphasizing that they
consist of those specially endowed with public spirit and educated to
conduct a thoughtful direction of national affairs: the fittest persons
whom the existing society could produce. He believed that since 1688 the
landed aristocracy had governed England badly: it reflected the
attitudes of unimaginative dilettantes incapable of the rigorous
intellect that government needed, and it was fettered by its own
enormous wealth and special privileges. Anxious to protect its own
position, it could do little to bridge the chasm between the social
classes, which increasingly endangered a Britain subject to the new
powerful pressures of nineteenth-century industrialism. To Mill Edition:
current; Page: [xviii] its strength and effectiveness seemed inferior to
those of the aristocracy of Prussia (23-4).

Through his reform programme Mill hoped to create a new and independent
ruling class of paid and professional parliamentarians freed from
electoral pledges. He believed that unpaid legislators and magistrates
sustained the monopoly power of the aristocracy because aristocrats
could usually afford to serve without pay (35). Among the Radicals the
issue of pledges provoked acrimonious debate. In 1832 Mill had irritated
some in arguing that, although in cases of constitutional change pledges
might sometimes be justified, they were in general bad. “The sovereignty
of the people,” he wrote, “is essentially a delegated sovereignty.
Government must be performed by the few, for the benefit of the many. .
. .”19 The same view he repeated in the “Rationale of Representation,”
contending that electors are obligated to select representatives fully
qualified to form sound decisions on public matters. They must not
expect that those they elect should act slavishly in parliament
according to popular judgment any more than patients expect a physician
to cure their ills according to their own chosen ideas of medicine (40).
For Mill, pledges conflicted with the essence of representative
government. Voters were free to reward or punish, by re-election or
rejection, a representative at the end of his term, but to shackle him
from the outset with inflexible instructions would cripple his powers of
initiative and responsibility.


AMERICA, TOCQUEVILLE, AND DEMOCRACY

As a British radical, Mill from youth was profoundly interested in the
United States. For him and most of his fellow utilitarians the republic
was a unique experiment of a democracy in action, and hence important
for all European liberals. Unlike the Tory writers of the Quarterly
Review, they looked to America to demonstrate the virtues of democracy,
and abundant praise of the United States became their orthodox practice.
They admired it for experimenting with new social ideas, rejecting an
established church, extending franchise laws, promoting popular
education, recognizing a free press, and believing in a free economy.
Such was Jeremy Bentham’s enthusiasm for America that to Andrew Jackson
he described himself as “more of a United Statesman than an Englishman.”
For him and his disciples the republic seemed to apply the principle of
utility more assiduously than did Britain.

It is hardly surprising, therefore, that between 1835 and 1840 Mill
wrote three leading articles on America: two lengthy reviews in 1835 and
1840 Edition: current; Page: [xix] on the separate parts of
Tocqueville’s Democracy in America and in 1836 an essay on the state of
American society as depicted in five contemporary volumes. In these
essays he endeavoured not merely to illustrate the work of a new and
major political thinker, but also to portray the democratic society of
the United States compared with the aristocratic regimes of Europe. In
doing this under the weighty influence of Tocqueville, he clarified and
matured his own thought on the merits and faults of democracy. Hence his
two essays on Tocqueville are highly significant in the evolution of his
thinking.

Almost the same age, although of different social backgrounds, the two
men had much in common. Both were convinced that the new industrial age
was destined to affect profoundly society and politics. Both were
interested in the shape of things to come, in the trend to equality, and
in democracy as almost an inevitable force of nature that must be
adjusted to human circumstances and needs. Both believed that it alone
could diffuse the spirit of a vigorous citizenship and sense of
community throughout the whole national state. Yet they were also deeply
concerned about its inherent defects and anxious to remedy them. “Man
cannot turn back the rivers to their source,” wrote Mill, “but it rests
with himself whether they shall fertilize or lay waste his fields”
(158).

Tocqueville’s idea of democracy was more loosely defined than Mill’s. He
referred to it less often as a particular form of government than as an
equality of social conditions, without elements of aristocracy and
privilege, the kind of equality which was best exemplified in the United
States. Equality of conditions might exist under an absolute ruler, and
Tocqueville feared that in some countries, including his own France, it
might emerge solely in that form. Mill, on the other hand, applied the
term democracy more consistently to a form of government in which the
people constitutionally exercised a dominant sway. He was fully aware,
however, that democratic government had wide social implications, and a
large measure of social equality was a natural accompaniment.

In his two reviews Mill welcomed Tocqueville’s book as a landmark in the
literature of politics, hailing the first part as among “the most
remarkable productions of our time” (57). He saw its author, in his
wide-ranging thought, as comparable to Montesquieu. His praise for the
second part was equally enthusiastic. It was “the first philosophical
book ever written on Democracy, as it manifests itself in modern
society.”20 The reasons for this laudation are found in the grand sweep
of Tocqueville’s sociological description and perception and his
penetrating comments on democracy, Edition: current; Page: [xx] its
mixed properties and tendencies, the dangers it confronted, and the
different demands it made on mankind. For Mill method was hardly less
important than content. In Tocqueville he saw the new kind of political
scientist he was ambitious to be himself, quick to probe the varied
social forces that mould man’s political conduct, skilful in combining
deduction and induction, and adept in applying comparative methods to
the facts of society and government.

In his first essay, especially, Mill employed long quotations to
illustrate Tocqueville’s views on American democracy and society and on
the operation of its institutions. He acted like a modest chairman,
briefly introducing a speaker and giving him abundant time to elaborate
his theme, confident in the speaker’s mastery of the subject. But his
quotations in both essays indicate his deep interest in certain aspects
of Tocqueville’s account, especially the role of a numerical majority
and its influences on individual and national life. Anxiously he
scrutinized how far in practice Americans respected the principle of
true democracy as defined in “The Rationale of Representation.” He was
hardly encouraged by his findings. The people often directly governed
rather than merely exerting an ultimate control over government. He
learned from Tocqueville how widely delegation had replaced
representation (74). Electors, however poorly informed, often laid down
conditions that their representatives were compelled to respect. The
majority was unmistakably dominant, constantly and aggressively asserted
its will, shaped the character of opinion, and lived in perpetual
adoration of itself. It was little comfort for Mill to read
Tocqueville’s verdict that he knew of no country with less independence
of mind and less real freedom of discussion than the United States (81).
No monarch had such power over opinion as the popular majority.
Tocqueville admitted that the majority refrained from attacking the
property and material interests of the rich minority, but it otherwise
imposed a despotic yoke on public opinion, on independent thought, and
hence on individuality of character.

In view of his previous generous admiration for America, Mill doubtless
wished that the evidence was different, but could not escape the
compelling force of Tocqueville’s critical picture. Yet, although he
accepted most of Tocqueville’s strictures on American institutions, he
sometimes tried to moderate and excuse them. In the first part of his
work Tocqueville concluded that the American electors were disposed to
choose mediocrities rather than able candidates, owing partly to their
own limited education and understanding and partly to the insatiable
envy that most men had for their superiors. Mill feared that this
charge, if true, meant that his own belief in a talented élite to guide
and instruct the democracy was unlikely to be justified. He thought he
found, however, in the facts furnished by Tocqueville a situation less
discouraging than had at first appeared. In critical Edition: current;
Page: [xxi] times able Americans assumed a positive leadership. In
ordinary times, unfortunately, the range of public activity was too
restricted to attract men of ambition and talent. Mill believed that
this situation would eventually improve with the advance of education,
general enlightenment, and the social needs of America.21 He was much
less pessimistic than Tocqueville about democracy’s falling under the
control of the mediocre.

In his first review Mill also questioned Tocqueville’s assertion that
aristocracy had qualities of prudence and steadiness absent in
democracy. The steadiness of an aristocracy, he said, was commonly
expressed in a tenacious grip on its own cherished privileges. Its
strength of will, as English history illustrated, was shaped by its
class interests, and its opinions tended to fluctuate with its immediate
impulses and needs (77-9).

Mill’s main criticism in his second essay was well taken: Tocqueville,
in failing to define democracy with precision, sometimes confused its
effects with those of a commercial civilization in general. As a nation
progresses in industry and wealth, its manufactures expand, its capital
grows, its class structure changes, and the intermediate group between
poor and rich, comprised of artisans and middle class, multiplies. This
may seem to make, as Tocqueville believed, a trend to equalization, but
it could be merely one of many consequences from augmented industry and
wealth, which created a highly complex society without necessarily
furthering political freedom and democratic equality. Mill doubted
whether in itself a commercial civilization, aside from other
influences, necessarily equalized conditions among men. At any rate it
failed to do so in Britain. There, he wrote, “The extremes of wealth and
poverty are wider apart, and there is a more numerous body of persons at
each extreme, than in any other commercial community” (193). Owing to
their abundant children, the poor remained poor, while the laws tended
to keep large concentrations of capital together, and hence the rich
remained rich. Great fortunes were accumulated and seldom distributed.
In this respect, Mill thought, Britain stood in contrast to the United
States, although in commercial prosperity and industrial growth she was
similar.

However ready to accept Tocqueville’s belief in the passion for equality
as a dynamic factor in modern industrial nations, Mill in comparing
Britain and the United States saw and illustrated other influences. He
agreed with Tocqueville that in the two countries the middle classes
were remarkably alike in structure and aspirations. Both experienced
social instability, the restless drive of individuals to improve their
lot, the ceaseless pursuit of wealth, and the enlargement of the middle
class through constant recruitment from below. But in one respect they
differed. Britain, unlike America, Edition: current; Page: [xxii] had a
governing and landed aristocracy, and also a leisured class and a
learned class, larger and more significant in influence than their
counterparts in the republic. Such class features produced between the
two countries differences in the quality of political life. Mill
admitted that in Britain profound changes then occurring narrowed the
divergences. The strongholds of aristocratic powers were weakening. The
House of Lords, for all its pretensions and authority, failed to defeat
the Reform Bill. Peers were now influenced by bourgeois opinion and even
taste. The edifice of government might still rest on an impressive
aristocratic base, but its transformation had begun, and Mill and the
Philosophic Radicals were determined that it must be carried to ultimate
success.

It is needless to dwell on differences in opinion between Mill and
Tocqueville, since the dissimilarities are less important than what the
men shared in common, Mill saw Tocqueville as he saw himself—a leader in
the great transition of thought between the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries and a contributor of social insights and ideas to those who
desired for Europe a new liberal age. In his Autobiography he described
how Tocqueville more effectively than any other contemporary depicted
the virtues of democracy as well as its perils. He admitted that his
French friend reinforced his own fears about the political tyranny of
popular opinion and influenced him in shifting his ideal from that of
pure democracy to its modified form later presented in Considerations on
Representative Government.22 Both men observed in America harsh forms of
popular tyranny, not in laws, but in what Mill called the dispensing
power over all law. “The people of Massachusetts,” he remarked, “passed
no law prohibiting Roman Catholic schools, or exempting Protestants from
the penalties of incendiarism; they contented themselves with burning
the Ursuline convent to the ground, aware that no jury would be found to
redress the injury” (177). In these cases popular tyranny was expressed
not merely in the action of mobs, incited by the passions of religion,
party, or race, but by the inability of the administrative and judicial
organs to work effectively owing to their direct dependence on popular
opinion.

Mill, like Tocqueville, saw in the democratic majority perennial threats
to what for both were supreme values: individuality, intellectual
variety, effective minority opinions, and the spontaneous initiatives
derived from individuals and groups. For Mill these values remained an
enduring element in his liberal philosophy and pervaded On Liberty.
Their implications for national development were manifest. But no single
rule or set of concepts could determine the same development for all
nations. Each nation must pursue a course appropriate to the varied
interests, circumstances, and temperament of its citizens. Years before
Mill had criticized Comte’s folly in Edition: current; Page: [xxiii]
assuming a single law of evolution for all nations, a criticism he never
retracted.23

Mill no less than Tocqueville was eager to recognize the main political
corollaries of these liberal ideas. He emphasized the importance for
individuals of fostering and preserving combinations or associations to
promote mutual protection and common causes, such as political unions,
antislavery societies, and the like. He saw the freedom of combination
as intimately joined to that of the press. “The real Political Unions of
England,” he wrote, “are the Newspapers. It is these which tell every
person what all other persons are feeling, and in what manner they are
ready to act.” (165.) He evidently did not foresee that sometimes
newspapers might also become the instruments of a democratic despotism.

He likewise agreed with Tocqueville in extolling the value of local
government as a means for extending among the people the management of
public business, training them in self-rule, and enlarging their scope
for political freedom. He here reflected his faith that under democracy
politics becomes a form of adult education. He was hardly less confident
than Tocqueville that the spirit and habit of local autonomy was a
primary source of American freedom and would no less promote freedom in
other democracies.

Finally, in his second article on Tocqueville he also expressed the
conviction that in a mass democracy, whether in Europe or America, it
was essential to bolster influences that countervailed those of the
mass. For him the evil was not the preponderance of a democratic class
in itself, but of any class, especially when it lacked intellectual
cultivation (196). He believed with Tocqueville that the overwhelming
dominance of a single class would always predispose it to establish a
deadening uniformity in the style and texture of life for the whole
society. This would mean an intellectually static community resembling
that of China as understood in Europe at the time.

Mill, like Tocqueville, remained apprehensive that in an industrial and
commercial age democracy would impoverish the national culture by
imposing on it a single and inflexible set of mass values. Although he
admitted that public opinion must rule, he speculated that to form

the best public opinion, there should exist somewhere a great social
support for opinions and sentiments different from those of the mass.
The shape which that support may best assume is a question of time,
place, and circumstance; but (in a commercial country, and in an age
when, happily for mankind, the military spirit is gone by) there can be
no doubt about the elements which must compose it: they are, an
agricultural class, a leisured class, and a learned class.

(199.)

These sentiments, tinged with Coleridgean conservatism, may have seemed
strange and unwelcome to some fellow Philosophic Radicals, but by 1840
Edition: current; Page: [xxiv] his associates in the movement had
learned that his Benthamite orthodoxy had long since disappeared.

It may be added that Mill did not remain convinced that the existence of
a leisured class was of pre-eminent importance. In 1847 he wrote to John
Austin:

I have even ceased to think that a leisured class, in the ordinary sense
of the term, is an essential constituent of the best form of society.
What does seem to me essential is that society at large should not be
overworked, nor over-anxious about the means of subsistence, for which
we must look to the grand source of improvement, repression of
population, combined with laws or customs of inheritance which shall
favour the diffusion of property instead of its accumulation in
masses.24

At this time Mill was working on his Principles of Political Economy,
and the healing virtues of the stationary state were fresh and vivid in
his mind.

In his essay on the “State of Society in America” Mill expressed not
merely some additional reflections on the American experiment, but also
briefly raised questions on how environment determines a nation’s
politics, how nations could benefit from one another’s experience
through a science of comparative institutions, and how American society
was judged by European observers in the doubtful light of their own
prejudices, especially hostility to popular rule. He was strongly
convinced that the American form of democracy must be directly related
to the special character of American society, moulded by a wide variety
of forces: abundant natural wealth, a fast growing population, a
remarkable opportunity for all classes to raise their standards of
living, the absence of aggressive neighbours, the lack of a leisured
class except in the southern states, and the inheritance of a language
and culture from a parent nation three thousand miles away. Its
experiment in politics was scarcely comprehensible apart from the
interplay of these numerous influences, all of which, although seldom
the product of government, impinged directly on government. They were
not all favourable to the success of democracy. To Mill the United
States was a classic demonstration of the intimate bonds between social
circumstances and political forms.

Characteristic is the sentence: “High wages and universal reading are
the two elements of democracy; where they co-exist, all government,
except the government of public opinion, is impossible” (99). Mill held
that the high premium on labour in North America meant that the common
man was not merely well remunerated but also had to be consulted about
his government. Likewise the general literacy of the Puritans,
originally cherished as a means for reading Holy Writ, had become the
invaluable medium for political and forensic debates whereby the
Americans established and Edition: current; Page: [xxv] sustained their
freedoms. Thus with the strokes of a broad brush Mill explained to
readers in the London Review American democracy in terms of environment,
history, and social conditions. He may have provided an unduly
simplified version of reality, but it was well calculated to correct the
partisan bias of the many itinerant writers who came and went across the
Atlantic.


“CIVILIZATION”

Mill’s long essay, “Civilization,” is closely related to those on
America and the ideas of Tocqueville. It reflects the same concern over
certain profound changes then occurring or about to occur in society and
their significance for the individual and his government.

Alexander Bain thought Mill’s definition of civilization inadequate and
much of his article merely a Philosophic Radical’s criticism of
contemporary British society.25 Mill explicitly restricted use of the
term to institutions and practices different from those of the savage.
“Whatever be the characteristics of what we call savage life,” he wrote,
“the contrary of these, or the qualities which society puts on as it
throws off these, constitute civilization” (120). A modern
anthropologist may be even less likely than Bain to feel satisfied with
this definition. Yet whatever its deficiency it in no way hampered Mill
in discussing that in which he was principally interested—certain
aspects of contemporary Britain on which he had strong opinions. He
advocated reform in many established institutions, ideas, and
prejudices. He recognized that in every country civilization exhibits
ill as well as salutary traits, and both he scrutinized.

Civilized men, unlike savages, have clustered in great and fixed
concentrations, acted together in large bodies for common purposes, and
proceeded from one material achievement to another. They have created
populous cities, developed specialized industries, accepted fully the
division of labour, expanded channels of trade, improvised techniques of
production, and applied science to the cultivation of the soil. Thus
they have augmented their material comforts and satisfactions as well as
their pleasures in social intercourse. Mill welcomed the general results
of this onward thrust of civilization, but was disturbed by some of its
features, and especially by the passing of power increasingly from
individuals and small groups of individuals to the masses, whose
importance grew while that of individuals shrank. The characteristic
product of modern material civilization has been a mass society, which
Mill no less than Tocqueville feared. “When the masses become powerful,”
he wrote, “an individual, or a small band of Edition: current; Page:
[xxvi] individuals, can accomplish nothing considerable except by
influencing the masses; and to do this becomes daily more difficult,
from the constantly increasing number of those who are vying with one
another to attract public attention” (126).

Not the least interesting part of his essay is a sketch of the possible
strategy whereby the literate and educated elements of the population
might guide the masses or create a rival power to them. He believed that
an effective civilization is possible only through the capacity of
individuals to combine for common ends. Combination, as in trade unions
and benefit societies, had already made the workers more powerful.
Combination and compromise also could enlarge the influence of the
literate middle class, demolish old barriers between all classes, and
extend the range of law and justice. English educational institutions
were imperfectly organized for their task, and he feared the advent of
democracy before the people were sufficiently educated and ready to
shoulder their responsibilities. He censured the ancient English
universities for failing to make the present rulers grasp what had to be
done in reform to avoid the worst features of mass domination. In
pursuing narrow sectarian ends, as in the exclusion of Dissenters, the
universities were ignoring political realities.26 They must moreover
extend their scope to serve a larger proportion of the population, and
at the same time sponsor more through research in the manner of the
German universities.

In his targets for criticism Mill included the Established Church. For
this ancient instrument of national religion and culture he had little
reverence, partly because he was not a believer, and partly because its
intimate alliance with the aristocracy had bolstered conservative forces
hostile to reform. Evident throughout his essay is what Matthew Arnold
called Mill’s insensitivity to religion, especially dogmatic religion.
On this subject he was explicit: “The principle itself of dogmatic
religion, dogmatic morality, dogmatic philosophy, is what requires to be
rooted out” (144). For him the Establishment in particular was too
sectarian, too protective of its own institutional monopoly, and too
much a prop of the existing social order. With satisfaction he witnessed
the shrinkage of its power as other religious bodies secured a greater
public freedom. In 1829 he described to Gustave d’Eichthal the immense
significance of Catholic emancipation. “It forms an era in civilization.
It is one of those great events, which periodically occur, by which the
institutions of a country are brought into harmony with the better part
of the mind of that country. . . .”27 He was gratified that the
Established Edition: current; Page: [xxvii] Church and its ally the
aristocracy had suffered a defeat, for he felt the emancipation had
dealt a fatal blow in general to exclusion from political rights on
grounds of religion. As a sequel to this event, Mill was inclined in the
early 1830s to predict an imminent collapse of the power of the Church.
Here his perception failed him. He greatly underestimated the Church’s
resilience, vitality, and capacity for change and survival, as he also
misunderstood the human feelings that helped to sustain it.

In turning from the general aspects of contemporary civilization to its
moral effects. Mill generalized freely about the imponderables in
individual conduct. He thought that civilization relaxed individual
energy and tended to focus it within the narrow sphere of the
individual’s money-getting pursuits. He believed that in the civilized
milieu the individual received so many elements of security and
protection for himself, family, and property, that he depended less on
his own unaided initiatives and exertions. This profound change in man’s
spirit and temper was illustrated in all phases of society, including
literature and the arts, which now tended to lose their older distinct
and enduring standards. As literacy spread, good literature diminished.
The influence of superior minds over the multitude weakened. “The
individual,” wrote Mill, “becomes so lost in the crowd, that though he
depends more and more upon opinion, he is apt to depend less and less
upon well-grounded opinion; upon the opinion of those who know him. An
established character becomes at once more difficult to gain, and more
easily to be dispensed with” (132). In Mill’s view it was now only in
small communities that the valuable influence of public opinion could be
demonstrated.

In discussing the advance of civilization Mill attempted no confident
and systematic balance-sheet of gains and losses for mankind. In his own
age of transition he evidently felt that his chief task as a utilitarian
reformer was to concentrate on augmenting the gains and minimizing the
losses in the best way possible. To this end his reformist
recommendations were directed.


“ESSAYS ON GOVERNMENT”

The one remaining selection in this volume illustrative of Mill’s
political ideas in the decade 1830-40 is a brief review of Essays on
Government (1840). The author of this slender volume was an anonymous
radical who believed in republican government, universal suffrage, the
ballot, and rule by a natural aristocracy composed of those with wisdom
and virtue whom the community selected in contrast to the existing
aristocracy of birth and wealth. Mill found in the book no deep or
original thought, but simply some rather naïve current thinking about
democracy. The machinery constituted Edition: current; Page: [xxviii]
for choosing a natural aristocracy does not necessarily secure one.
Unlike the author, Mill was not confident that the people would either
know where to find natural aristocrats or select them as rulers when
they found them.

Further he saw in the book contradictions between the principal
prerequisites for good government. It insisted that the government must
conform to the opinion of the governed, and also that the rulers must be
the wisest and best persons in the community. Would the wise ones
consent to rule in conformity with the opinions of the less wise?
Dissatisfied with the book’s ambiguities, Mill summed up his own
position:

We think that democracy can govern: it can make its legislators its mere
delegates, to carry into effect its preconceived opinions. We do not say
that it will do so. Whether it will, appears to us the great question
which futurity has to resolve; and on the solution of which it depends
whether democracy will be that social regeneration which its partisans
expect, or merely a new form of bad government, perhaps somewhat better,
perhaps somewhat worse, than those which preceded it.

(152.)


MATURE VIEWS, 1840-73

two related themes dominated Mill’s political thought from 1840 to his
death: the invention and maintenance of institutions that would
efficiently express the sanction of citizens for what rulers did in
their name; and the appropriate role of the state in furthering human
betterment in a Britain hurrying deeper into the industrial age. On the
first theme his Considerations on Representative Government summarized
most of his thinking over many years and became his chief classic in
political science, providing a practical and liberal guide to
nineteenth-century man searching for stable and competent government. On
his second theme, however, Mill produced no equivalent single volume,
although of cardinal importance were his On Liberty and his Principles
of Political Economy in its successive editions. Illuminating also on
this subject are his occasional writings and speeches, especially those
on Ireland. In the last century some Englishmen viewed Ireland as a
social laboratory where it was necessary to try special experiments not
tolerable at home. Mill in particular was ready to enlarge greatly the
agenda of government to combat Ireland’s indigenous and lingering
poverty.


CIVIL SERVICE REFORM

In the seven years before Considerations on Representative Government
appeared, Mill produced some papers that foreshadowed the arguments in
Edition: current; Page: [xxix] his major essay. First in time was the
submission, requested by Sir Charles Trevelyan, then Assistant Secretary
to the Treasury, which strongly commended the Northcote-Trevelyan Report
for advocating the recruitment of civil servants, not by the casual
methods of political patronage, but by open competitive examinations.
For Mill this genuine reform harmonized with his long-held conviction
that representative government could be efficient only if conducted by
the country’s best-educated and orderly minds. On reading the report he
quickly dispatched a characteristic comment to Harriet: “it is as
direct, uncompromising, & to the point, without reservation, as if we
had written it.”28 Apart from placing administration under the control
of competent and professional officials, he hoped that the new mode of
recruitment would strengthen existing political institutions by opening
public positions to the competition of all classes and persons, thus
diminishing the traditional sway of the aristocracy and privileged
classes. This in turn, he thought, would extend intellectual cultivation
and encourage talented individuals.

Sir Charles Trevelyan, an unshakably determined man, was not content
simply to submit a report. To overcome troublesome opposition he
carefully primed the press, solicited the opinions of influential
individuals likely to support it (Mill being one), and printed them in a
special blue book, Papers on the Reorganisation of the Civil Service.
Yet his effort won little immediate success. The proposals were bitterly
resisted, and their supporters had to be content with piecemeal reforms
until their final triumph under Gladstone in 1870.29


PARLIAMENTARY REFORM

It is evident from Mill’s correspondence that throughout the 1850s he
thought frequently about the contentious issue of parliamentary reform.
The outcome was a pamphlet and a major article, both published in 1859:
Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform and “Recent Writers on Reform.” The
first of these was largely written in 1853 with subsequent revisions and
additions. In it he argued that since the Reform Bill British opinion
had profoundly changed. A new and restless public came to believe that a
further improvement in parliamentary representation was a national
necessity. An unremitting trial of strength between the progressive and
stationary forces confronted all party leaders, who were compelled to
recognize that out of Edition: current; Page: [xxx] the ceaseless
dialectic of debate change must come. For them the main issue was its
extent and timing.

In the light of this situation, Mill in his pamphlet attempted to
formulate his own electoral programme in seven main proposals: grouping
of small boroughs into districts, gradual steps to universal male and
female suffrage, electioneering reform to free candidates from expenses
amounting to a burdensome property qualification, a minimal educational
requirement for the franchise, plural voting based on educational
attainments, representation of minorities through the cumulative vote,
and rejection of the ballot, which had not yet become a part of British
electoral law.

Some of these topics naturally figured more prominently in public
discussion than others, and it is needless here to examine Mill’s
arguments on all of them. His proposal to protect the views of
minorities through the cumulative vote became obsolete a month after the
publication of Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform, with the appearance of
Thomas Hare’s Election of Representatives. Hare’s book, discussed below,
promptly convinced Mill. In March 1859 he enthusiastically wrote to its
author: “You appear to me to have exactly, and for the first time,
solved the difficulty of popular representation; and by doing so, to
have raised up the cloud of gloom and uncertainty which hung over the
futurity of representative government and therefore of civilization.”30
Henceforth he was committed to Hare’s scheme of electoral reform, with
its preferential and transferable vote, calculated quota, and
transformation of the country into a single constituency. To him it
seemed the best protection for minorities that parliament could provide.

Mill’s proposals in Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform had in the
preceding years evolved through prolonged discussions with his wife, who
then greatly influenced his thinking. His suggested educational
qualification for the franchise, and his rejection of the secret ballot
provoked much controversy. On the first of these, he argued that a
minimal education test must accompany a universal franchise. In view of
the high value he consistently placed on a trained intelligence, he
found it impossible to accept the equality of educated and uneducated
electors.

If it is asserted that all persons ought to be equal in every
description of right recognized by society, I answer, not until all are
equal in worth as human beings. It is the fact, that one person is not
as good as another; and it is reversing all the rules of rational
conduct, to attempt to raise a political fabric on a supposition which
is at variance with fact Putting aside for the present the consideration
of moral worth, . . . a person who cannot read, is not as good, for the
purpose of human life, as one who can.

(323.)

Taking off from a premise that rejected the old radical dogma of “one
man one vote,” Mill argued that all adult men and women who passed an
Edition: current; Page: [xxxi] education test should be enfranchised,
but those with superior training should receive plural or extra voting
power, even to the extent of some individuals having three or more
votes. In this Mill’s logic may have been impeccable, but the political
practicability of his proposal was a different matter. The passion for
equality that Tocqueville saw as part and parcel of the democratic
movement was unlikely to render possible the kind of voting that Mill
described. He himself appeared to have doubts. In the same year he
admitted to John Elliot Cairnes that his proposal for plural voting on
the basis of intellectual qualification was intended “not as an
immediately practical measure but as a standard of theoretical
excellence.”31 Yet on the same matter he commented to Alexander Bain:
“One must never suppose what is good in itself to be visionary because
it may be far off. . . . We must remember too that the numerical
majority are not the politically strongest force yet. The point to be
decided is, how much power is to be yielded to them; & justice always
affords the best basis for a compromise, which even if only temporary
may be eminently useful.”32

On the issue of the ballot, Mill in Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform
publicly expressed for the first time his volte-face from a position
stoutly held in the 1830s. In the earlier period, he, like other
Philosophic Radicals, had extolled the ballot as scarcely less important
than an extended franchise in overthrowing the ruling oligarchy in
Britain. Without it the franchise might mean little. For him and his
associates it became virtually a symbol of their radicalism. Secret
voting, once established, was expected to demolish the political power
of the aristocracy and privileged classes, and hence open the road for
the march of the Radical party. It would protect tenants from coercion
by landlords, customers from coercion by shopkeepers and vice versa,
employees from coercion by employers, and the general public from
coercion by miscellaneous and often sinister interests of every kind. It
would benefit the people in that comprehensive way so dear to the
Radicals. In 1837 Mill told Tocqueville with simplistic assurance that
with the ballot “reform will have finally triumphed: the aristocratical
principle will be completely annihilated, & we shall enter into a new
era of government.”33 He then believed that in the country there was a
deep radicalism which without the ballot was repressed. Two years later,
in a letter to John M. Kemble, he wrote in more moderate terms, but
still considered the ballot essential for the success of the radical
cause.34

In defending his change of mind in the 1850s, Mill argued that when
earlier he and the Philosophic Radicals had first advocated the ballot
they were justified by the circumstances of the time. Many voters were
then artfully manipulated by landlords and employers, and unable to
declare their Edition: current; Page: [xxxii] real convictions in an
open election. Twenty-five years later, however, the conditions were
different. No longer were the rich the masters of the country. The
middle classes and workers were less subservient to those above them,
felt their own strength, and resented attempts by others to coerce them.
In the larger electorates the real evil now lay in the selfish
partialities of the voter himself, which reduced his concern for the
general interest. Open voting, Mill thought, might best correct this
egocentric attitude, foster a wholesome sense of public responsibility,
and emphasize the vote as a trust for which the voter was accountable to
the community.

Social circumstances had unquestionably changed, but for most Liberals
the changes had failed to diminish the practical advantages of the
ballot as a means for moderating the influences of wealth and power.
Mill and his wife thus fell singularly out of step with the main army of
reformers, who persistently advocated this change until its final
triumph under Gladstone in 1872. Competent studies of the electoral
system in this period seem to support the practical utility of the
ballot.35

The few remaining active Philosophic Radicals, like George Grote and
Francis Place, deplored Mill’s change of view. Place, often critical of
Mill, was specially irritated by his pronounced shift of opinion on the
ballot. “If James Mill,” he wrote bitterly, “could have anticipated that
his son John Stuart should preach so abominable a heresy . . . he would
have cracked his skull.”36 Place charged Mill with a shocking
inconsistency, but on his part Mill thought mere consistency a minor
virtue. Where circumstances change a situation, he would argue, then it
is only common sense to alter one’s view of it.

In “Recent Writers on Reform” Mill examined the ideas of three
contemporary writers on parliamentary institutions in the 1850s,
selected for their distinction and the importance of their ideas: John
Austin, James Lorimer, and Thomas Hare. Austin had been one of Mill’s
oldest friends, under whom as a youth he had studied law, and whose
ability he greatly admired. Yet Austin, although a disciple of Bentham,
had in later years become conservative and estranged from Mill, who in
particular was disturbed by his vehement criticism of the French
revolutionary government of 1848. In his Plea for the Constitution
Austin displayed a hostility to further parliamentary reform in the
conviction that it was likely to destroy the delicate balance of the
existing constitution and the appropriate attitudes of mind which
facilitated its operation. The constitution, he believed, Edition:
current; Page: [xxxiii] combined democratic and aristocratic elements.
The electors were a democratic body, while the elected in the main
constituted a remarkably skilled, devoted, and aristocratic governing
class, who throughout a long span of time had acquired and were still
able to apply the arts of ruling a country they understood.

This version of the British system combined with a laudation of the
governing aristocracy was something that since the 1820s Mill had
consistently condemned. On finding it in the pages of Austin he
criticized it afresh, although, evidently out of respect for his old
friend, his condemnation was moderate. He was content to show that the
aristocratic classes, who had an opportunity to become instructed and
trained statesmen, had frittered away their opportunities. Historically,
they were less effective than the open aristocracy of Rome or the closed
aristocracy of Venice. He noted Austin’s point that parliamentary reform
was needless because the existing elected members of the lower house
were already fully alert to the requirements of sound legislation and
able to draft it. But Mill replied that, aside from law-making,
parliament had another role. The House of Commons as the grand council
of the entire nation must contain spokesmen to discuss the critical
issues that divide the community and reflect the diverse shades of
opinion in all classes. The most numerous class in the kingdom, that of
the workers, had a moral right to representation to avoid having its
affairs disposed of in its absence. He did not believe that recognizing
this right of the workers and shopkeepers would produce all the
disastrous social consequences that Austin took for granted.

By contrast, Mill had some reason for satisfaction with James Lorimer’s
Political Progress Not Necessarily Democratic, for Lorimer was hardly
less hostile than himself to the domination of the majority, accepted
universal suffrage, but also favoured plural votes for certain citizens,
although his criterion for them differed from Mill’s. He thought that a
man’s social status, whether that of a peer or a labourer, should
determine his voting power. This thesis Mill rejected as a dangerous
sophistry, since it assumed that society must bend to forces created by
itself, whereas he was conviced that men must intelligently try to mould
society into something better, and his proposal for plural votes was
intended to help the educated in doing so. In Lorimer’s work he was
specially gratified with one feature: the rejection of current demands
for the representation of interests. Mill expressed his own
characteristic view that whenever interests are not identical with the
general interest, the less they are represented the better. “What is
wanted is a representation, not of men’s differences of interest, but of
the differences in their intellectual points of view. Shipowners are to
be desired in Parliament, because they can instruct us about ships, not
because they are interested in having protecting duties.” (358.) Mill
had no intention of suggesting Edition: current; Page: [xxxiv] that
ideas can always be divorced from interests. As a reformer of society he
knew better. He was trying to emphasize, as he did frequently, the
necessity for cultivating an overriding and dispassionate sense of a
public interest, which in his opinion was the prime purpose of a
representative government.

The most important part of Mill’s article dealt with Thomas Hare’s book
and the electoral mechanism it recommended to ensure for minorities a
parliamentary voice equal to their strength. Hare appeared to solve a
problem in representation that had worried Mill for a quarter of a
century: how the domination by an electoral majority could be mitigated
and a real image of the nation’s varied groups be expressed. It was only
by solving this problem that true rather than false democracy could be
achieved. He unhesitantly welcomed Hare’s departure from the principle
of strict territorial representation, hitherto dominant in the
constitution of the Commons. No longer would it be necessary for a
candidate to gain or keep his seat by those “time-serving arts, and
sacrifices of his convictions to the local or class prejudices and
interests of any given set of electors” (366). Through the transferable
vote he could appeal to a wider electorate, while on their part electors
could enjoy a larger range in the choice of candidates, and thus
achieve, as Mill said, a more personal rather than local representation.
He expected that the quality of candidates would greatly improve, the
tone of public debate rise, and the inducements of a parliamentary
career for talented men increase. He enthusiastically wrote to Hare in
December, 1859: “If the Americans would but adopt your plan (which I
fear they never will) the bad side of their government and institutions,
namely the practical exclusion of all the best minds from political
influence, would soon cease. Let us hope that in the old country (thanks
to you) democracy will come in this better form.”37

Mill was confident that with the implementation of Hare’s proposals any
ill consequences of universal suffrage would be greatly diminished and
even the plural voting he had recommended might become unnecessary. He
hoped that the system could be accepted without prolonged delay, for
reasons he confided to Henry Fawcett in February 1860: “It is an uphill
race, and a race against time, for if the American form of democracy
overtakes us first, the majority will no more relax their despotism than
a single despot would.”38

Mill’s hopes for an early acceptance of the new principles were
singularly unrealistic. Yet for the remainder of his life he continued
to be an undaunted advocate of the single transferable vote and
constantly encouraged and helped his friends like Hare and Fawcett in
their efforts. Although women’s suffrage and the Hare system of
electoral reform were not the sole Edition: current; Page: [xxxv]
practical causes that occupied him in the 1860s, they were pre-eminent
in appeal, and when in the House of Commons he strove to further both.
Despite his efforts parliament never took the action he wanted, and the
reasons are not far to seek. At the time when Mill was advocating a new
electoral system, party managers gradually began to remould the
organization of the two major parties to render them more disciplined
and effective instruments for shaping policies and winning elections.
For them the Hare-Mill electoral ideas seemed too revolutionary, too
complicated, and their effects on party fortunes too uncertain to be
acceptable. Hence, except for some of their members, they showed little
interest in proportional representation of the type that Mill supported
and were unwilling to incorporate it as an essential element in their
political plans. Gladstone, for example, although in some reforms he was
evidently influenced by Mill, rejected proportional representation when
he considered electoral changes. This is not to say, however, that
Mill’s ideas lacked influence. Even into the twentieth century, his
basic idea, as stated in Representative Government, continued to incite
the interest of many: in a democracy, any and every section must be
represented, not disproportionately, but proportionately. A majority of
the electors should always have a majority of the representatives; a
minority of electors should always have a minority of representatives.


“CONSIDERATIONS ON REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT”

Considerations on Representative Government brings together many of
Mill’s views expressed in earlier writings, especially those on the
domination of majorities, the proposals of Thomas Hare, the folly of
extracting pledges from parliamentarians, the superiority of public
voting, the equity of female suffrage, and the desirability of plural
votes for the educated.39 But the book is more than a résumé of previous
opinions. It contains some of the author’s most effective arguments on
political liberalism and it assesses the liabilities no less than the
assets of what for Mill was the best form of government. It has usually
been rated as one of the most influential appraisals of the subject
written in Victorian England, though to a modern political analyst it
has some deficiencies. It says little about the social and economic
environment in which the institutions are expected to operate, although
Mill was well aware of social forces and class struggles. Another work
of the same decade, the English Constitution by Walter Bagehot, has
perhaps since received more profuse acclaim, especially for elegance of
style, but, except on the subject of Crown and parliament, Bagehot’s
range Edition: current; Page: [xxxvi] was narrower and his probing of
problems less profound and original.40

It is not proposed here to examine and evaluate in detail the contents
of its eighteen chapters, but merely to comment on salient features. At
the outset Mill attempts to distinguish the two contemporary forms of
political speculation. The first postulated politics as a practical art,
the product of invention and contrivance, concerned with means and ends
and the devices for persuading citizens to accept them. It considered
government a machine and a matter of rational choice, an opinion
congenial to many British utilitarians. The second viewed government as
less a machine than a living social organism, evolving like organisms in
natural history. Emerging from simple situations, it grows spontaneously
under the shaping influences of environment and the habits, instincts,
and unconscious wants and desires of mankind This theory was much
cherished by Conservatives in Britain.

Mill believes that neither theory alone explains the nature of politics.
Each has elements of truth; each in itself can mislead. But both
together help to further political comprehension. For him the essential
fact is that political institutions, as the work of men, depend on will
and thought, and are subject to the errors as well as the wisdom of
human judgment. Unlike trees, which once planted grow while men sleep,
they are controlled by the constant decisions and participation of
individuals, exposed to a host of influences. “It is what men think,
that determines how they act” (382). He rejects the idea that any people
is capable of operating any type of political system. A bewildering
medley of circumstances usually determines the nature and outlook of a
country’s government. For a system to be successful, the people must be
willing to accept it, do whatever ensures its survival, and strive to
fulfil its purposes. Representative government makes heavy demands on
the energy and initiative of citizens, requiring in particular
self-discipline, moderation, and a spirit of compromise. It can succeed
only when, in a favourable environment, the citizens have the qualities
requisite to operate it. Mill admits that until relatively recent times
a free and popular government was rarely possible outside a city
community because physical conditions failed to permit the emergence and
propagation of a cohesive public opinion. These views were not new to
him in the 1860s. In his Autobiography he relates that some thirty years
earlier he had seen representative democracy as a question of time,
place, and circumstance.41

Mill viewed government as primarily an instrument to further the
improvement Edition: current; Page: [xxxvii] of mankind, and to this end
representative institutions are ideally the best, although hitherto
human progress has often been served by efficient regimes that did not
represent the people. An autocracy which successfully curbs a lawless
and turbulent populace may for an interval provide an essential
prerequisite for the order and progress of civilization: the ingrained
habits and spirit of obedience to law. At critical times enlightened
despots can achieve concrete social advances that may be less feasible
under representative institutions, which permit powerful vested
interests to block reform.

Nevertheless, for Mill the most desirable form of government, provided
the people are willing and able to fulfil its conditions, is
representative, because it offers the maximum opportunity for fostering
men’s intelligence, virtue, and happiness. But at the same time he
admits that where the people are morally and mentally unfit for this
demanding form of rule, it may become an instrument of tyranny, and
popular elections less a security against misgovernment than an
additional wheel in its machinery (378). Even in the progressive
democracies many men are content to be passive in public affairs.
Absorbed in private cares and satisfactions, they patiently endure
social evils and surrender to the pressure of circumstances. Usually
present, however, are an energetic and active few who express thought,
advocate innovations, and encourage provocative debate, thus making
progress possible. Representative institutions enable these few to
thrash out differences and reach workable agreements for the common
good. With characteristic sober optimism Mill describes the competitive
and restless spirit of liberal society as he perceives it in the
nineteenth century: “All intellectual superiority is the fruit of active
effort. Enterprise, the desire to keep moving, to be trying and
accomplishing new things for our own benefit or that of others, is the
parent even of speculative, and much more of practical, talent. . . .
The character which improves human life is that which struggles with
natural powers and tendencies, not that which gives way to them.” (407.)


Electoral Machinery, Responsibility, and Expertise

In Representative Government, Mill is principally concerned with three
institutional features: the electoral machinery, the structure of a
responsible national government, and the paramount role of a
professional and expert class in administration and law-making.

The first of these themes, which he had earlier explored in articles,
emphasizes his distinction between true and false democracy. True
democracy represents all, and not merely the majority. In it the
different interests, opinions, and grades of intellect are heard, and by
weight of character and strength of argument influence the rest.42 This
democracy is achieved by Edition: current; Page: [xxxviii] reforming the
electoral system according to the proposals of Thomas Hare, by ensuring
that everyone, male and female alike, has a voice (although not an equal
voice) in the voting process, and by fostering education from infancy
through life. Mill believes that the expansion of democratic rights in
itself exerts a pervasive educational influence. He accepts
Tocqueville’s belief that American democracy fostered both a robust
patriotism and an active intelligence. “No such wide diffusion of the
ideas, tastes, and sentiments of educated minds,” he writes, “has ever
been seen elsewhere, or even conceived as attainable” (468). He strongly
holds this view, although in earlier essays on the United States he also
acknowledged in the American electorate a narrow and intolerant
mentality. Although Mill at times fluctuates between trust and distrust
of democracy, he always believes in its potentiality to improve men.
Active citizenship can usually nourish the qualities that good
citizenship demands, draw out human resources otherwise dormant, and
advance the lot of mankind.

In discussing the executive in the representative system, Mill is the
empiricist and Benthamite, who is eager to accept innovations but
clearly places a high value on what has been tested by experience. He
sanctions the parliamentary executive, which the British developed
through common sense and the accidents of a long history. Indeed, he
gives scant attention to any other system except the American, which
affords him merely a basis for contrasts. With brevity and acumen he
discusses precepts that must govern a responsible and effective
executive. “It should be apparent to all the world, who did everything,
and through whose default anything was left undone. Responsibility is
null when nobody knows who is responsible,” (520.) But it is equally
true that in many counsellors there is wisdom. A single individual even
in his own business seldom judges right, and still less in that of the
public. These and related points, he thinks, are woven into the fabric
of British parliamentary practice.

Distinguishing between policy and administration, he is anxious that in
the latter highly trained minds should save democracy from errors. He
fears that the popular tolerance of mediocrity impairs the competence
and quality of the state. In defending the Northcote-Trevelyan Report on
the civil service he had advocated the recruitment of officials through
competitive examinations from the ablest brains in the country,
irrespective of social class. This case he confidently argues afresh in
Representative Government (529-33) and defends it for every democratic
state. In 1869 he writes to an American correspondent that “the
appointments to office, without regard Edition: current; Page: [xxxix]
to qualifications, are the worst side of American institutions: the main
cause of what is justly complained of in their practical operation, and
the principal hindrance to the correction of what is amiss; as well as a
cause of ill-repute to democratic institutions all over the world.”43

Even in Britain he saw a too common inclination to ignore in officials
the need for special qualifications: “Unless a man is fit for the
gallows, he is thought to be about as fit as other people for almost
anything” (427). Critical of British complacency and aristocratic
casualness, he constantly extols the professional and the expert above
the amateur and the dilettante.

His zeal for professional skills extends from administration to
lawmaking. In his opinion a large and unwieldy parliament can no more
legislate than administer. His Benthamite conscience was hurt by the
haphazard and often dilatory manner in which British laws were made,
with little concern for whether they fitted logically into the existing
legal structure. His remedy was a legislative commission, composed of
those who from assiduous study and long experience acquired an expertise
in drafting bills which parliament could pass, reject, or return for
further consideration (430-2). A legislature in Mill’s opinion should
not itself draft law, but merely ensure its competent drafting. He
suggests that on their appointment members of the commission should
become life peers and thus enlarge the element of expertise in the House
of Lords. In his chapter on second chambers, however, he emphasizes that
the House of Lords should not be considered the main instrument for
tempering the ascendancy of the majority in the lower house, a task
better achieved through the electoral reforms that he and Thomas Hare
advocated. As a drafting body, Mill’s legislative commission resembled
the Parliamentary Counsel to the Treasury established by Gladstone in
1869, but Mill would have given to permanent experts more power than any
House of Commons was ever likely to concede. His sympathy always seemed
stronger for the men in Whitehall than for those in Westminster, for the
officials rather than the politicians.

More than a quarter of Representative Government is devoted to four
topics that may seem somewhat marginal to the main subject of the book.
But because for Mill they are important and illustrate cardinal features
of his liberalism they merit separate discussion.


Local Government

In both On Liberty and Representative Government Mill extols local
institutions as essential for the welfare and education of the people.
They permit citizens to acquire invaluable experience in working for
common ends, introduce them to the skills and ethics of collaboration,
and are an indispensable preparatory school for the democratic state. In
Britain, moreover, such Edition: current; Page: [xl] institutions are a
necessary auxiliary to the national parliament itself, which otherwise
would become harassed and strained by tasks better left to local bodies,
visible and sensitive to local electorates and directly accountable to
them. A robust municipal system, Mill believed, would nourish a
responsible public spirit and foster among the citizenry the political
enlightenment essential for an extended franchise and a viable
democracy.

In these views Mill was faithful to the utilitarian and radical
tradition, drawing inspiration from Bentham who had emphasized the
inherent value of local government and the necessity for its overhaul in
England. He shared an early and lifelong friendship with Edwin Chadwick,
a zealous and energetic Benthamite and the chief architect of municipal
reform in the 1830s and 1840s. In 1833 he saw Chadwick as “one of the
most remarkable men of our time in the practical art of Government. . .
.”44 He had ample reasons for praising his friend, although Chadwick
incurred much unpopularity for an apparently uncompassionate attitude
towards the administration of the Poor Law and for centralist
prejudices. The two men freely consulted, exchanged general ideas, and
usually agreed on policy. Mill supported the major innovations that were
deeply indebted to Chadwick’s utilitarian thought and ingenuity; in
particular the Poor Law Amendment Act of 1834, the Corporations Act of
1835, and the Public Health Act of 1848, each of which was a conspicuous
landmark in the evolution of new forms of local administration and
service.

When in 1861 Mill came to write his chapter on local government he
surveyed a scene of increasing complexity and baffling confusion. The
rapid growth of industry and population had created massive urban
concentrations of people clamouring for new and varied services. The
different municipal bodies launched in the 1830s and 1840s were busily
trying to cope with the problems of a social cauldron. The Boards of
Poor Law Guardians, the borough councils, and the numerous ad hoc boards
and commissions responsible for specific services all attempted to give
a new meaning to municipal rule in a changing society. But in the
counties the ancient system of appointed justices of the peace meeting
in Quarter Sessions still survived. On this institution Mill as a
faithful Radical is caustic:

The mode of formation of these bodies is most anomalous, they being
neither elected, nor, in any proper sense of the term, nominated, but
holding their important functions, like the feudal lords to whom they
succeeded, virtually by right of their acres. . . . The institution is
the most aristocratic in principle which now remains in England: far
more so than the House of Lords, for it grants public money and disposes
of important public interests, not in conjunction with a popular
assembly, but alone.

(537.)

Edition: current; Page: [xli]
He would correct the deficiencies of county government through elected
county councils to replace the Quarter Sessions, a reform not achieved
until 1888.

Mill also attacks the cluttering proliferation of boards and commissions
which needlessly fragmented and confused English civic life. He
anticipates the Royal Sanitary Commission’s Report of 1871 and the
critical verdict that England suffered from a chaos of local authorities
and a chaos of local rates.45 He advocates consolidation of the existing
services (such as paving, lighting, water supply, and drainage) under a
single elected council rather than leaving them under separate ad hoc
commissions. In brief, he recommends for all the local business of a
town one body, whose members should be chosen only by ratepayers. He
criticizes the subdivision of London into several independent units,
each jealously clinging to responsibility for providing the same
services, and thus preventing co-operation. Like other of Mill’s ideas
in Representative Government, this one played a practical part in his
parliamentary career when, a few years later, he introduced the first
proposal for a London Corporation.46

Mill had pronounced convictions on the relations of central and local
governments, believing that the central authority’s principal task was
to give instructions and that of the local authority to apply them.
Action must be localized, though knowledge, to be useful to all citizens
in the kingdom, should be centralized. In the public interest a close
partnership between the two levels of government is imperative. The
central government should designate a specific department to act as a
responsible guardian, adviser, and critic, scrutinizing everything done
in local areas and making its fund of special knowledge available to
those who need it. It should in particular supervise those matters of
national interest left to local administration, but its power should be
limited to compelling local officers to obey the laws enacted for their
guidance. His chief example for this type of supervision is that of the
Poor Law Board over the Local Guardians.

In their standard work on local government, Josef Redlich and Francis
Hirst remark that Bentham’s “idea of centralisation was interpreted,
modified, and adapted to English needs by Mill and not till it was
adapted by Mill was it fully adopted by England.”47 His influence on
local government clearly asserted itself in the years after 1871 with
the organization of an efficient central authority for doing what he had
long advocated, supervising municipal rule. In these ideas he
demonstrates his type of utilitarian thought Edition: current; Page:
[xlii] at its best, especially in taking traditional English
institutions and adapting them to the necessities of a new industrial
age.


Nationality

Mill’s discussion of nationality, unlike his discussion of local
government, might at the time have seemed of little relevance to
Britain’s domestic politics. But in the wider perspective of her
relations with continental Europe it was important. The idea of a
self-conscious nationality emerged as a revolutionary force in
transforming European politics after the French Revolution, and in
Mill’s opinion Britain could not elude its wide-ranging effects.

His chapter on the subject is brief, little more than half the length of
that on local government, perhaps too brief for him to render full
justice to the magnitude and complexity of the theme. In “Coleridge” and
A System of Logic he had viewed nationality as an essential condition
for a stable political society, but emphasized that he did not mean
nationality in the vulgar sense.48 In the interval between these
writings and the appearance of Representative Government Mill saw
nationality in Europe grow stronger in influence, more militant, and
more uncompromising. It was manifested in a people through a powerful
sense of community and an anxiety to live under one government. It was
fostered by a variety of influences, such as identity of race, a common
homeland, common language, common religion, and a common sense of
history. “But the strongest of all is identity of political antecedents:
the possession of a national history, and consequent community of
recollections; collective pride and humiliation, pleasure and regret,
connected with the same incidents in the past” (546). This passage has
been quoted and requoted. Yet in his brief sketch Mill does not explain
precisely how, why, and when the actual unifying sense of a common
national history arises, especially in cases like Germany and Italy,
where for generations deep political divergences expressed in a plethora
of small states seemed more conspicuous than unity.49

Mill took a definite position on the relations of nationality to
democracy. “Where the sentiment of nationality exists in any force,
there is a primâ facie case for uniting all the members of the
nationality under the same government, and a government to themselves
apart. This is merely saying that the question of government ought to be
decided by the governed.” To this remark he adds another no less
revealing: “Free institutions are next to impossible in a country made
up of different nationalities” (547). In brief, Edition: current; Page:
[xliii] democracy works best in a uni-national state of like-minded
people. He contends that different nationalities, speaking different
languages, would hamper the crystallizing of public opinion on which
successful representative institutions depend. Social fragmentation and
divisiveness would result from the presence of separate leaders of
different nationalities. The same books, newspapers, pamphlets, and
speeches would fail to circulate throughout all sectors of the society.
Each nationality would thus differently assess facts and differently
express opinions. Such differences, when sharp enough, would favour
despotism rather than freedom. Politicians for their own advantage and
power would exploit mutual antipathies.

Mill makes two far-reaching qualifications to his principle that the
boundaries of state and nation should coincide. First, circumstances may
sometimes render it difficult or impossible to implement: for example,
in parts of Europe, notably the Austrian Empire, nationalities were so
intricately intermingled as to make separate national states
impracticable. In such cases the people affected must make a virtue of
necessity and tolerantly accept life together under regimes of equal
rights and equal laws. Second, it is often socially advantageous for a
small nationality, rather than pursuing political independence, to merge
in a larger one. He thinks it preferable for a Breton or Basque to
become a part of the richly-endowed French nation than “to sulk on his
own rocks, the half-savage relic of past times, revolving in his own
little mental orbit, without participation or interest in the general
movement of the world” (549). He believes that this also applies to the
Welshman and the Scottish Highlander. Whatever his sympathy for such
small nations, he is confident that their members would reap cultural
benefits from close association with the larger nation, and in return
confer benefits. In this type of situation it is essential for the
weaker to receive not only equal justice but equal consideration, and
thus help to blend qualities inherent in the different nationalities to
the advantage of mankind.

Mill’s qualifications to his main thesis on state and nation are often
forgotten while his general thesis is remembered. They are manifest in
his treatment of the contentious national problem of Ireland. This Mill
discussed in a sparse single paragraph in Representative Government, but
in subsequent writings he said much on the subject, and notably in his
pamphlet England and Ireland.50

Mill recognizes that the nationality of the Irish had never been
absorbed in the larger nationality of Britain, as Bretons and Alsatians
had been absorbed in that of France. For this result he gives two
reasons: the Irish are numerous enough to constitute in themselves a
respectable nationality and had for generations nursed a deep enduring
enmity towards England Edition: current; Page: [xliv] because of its
harsh methods of rule. His comments in Representative Government suggest
that Mill believed that recent improvements in British policy had
reduced Irish hostility, and in the future even more harmonious
relations between the two countries might be expected. Hence he omits
discussion of whether Ireland’s distinct nationality requires a separate
statehood, as his general principle would imply. Seven years later,
however, in England and Ireland, he is more pessimistic. In the interval
a severe agrarian depression and Irish agitations for land reform had
failed to win an adequate response from the British parliament. The
consequent rise of a revolutionary Fenian movement committed to tactics
of violence to achieve independence worsened and embittered relations
between the two countries. Mill now wrote a sombre criticism of British
rulers: “What seems to them the causelessness of the Irish repugnance to
our rule, is the proof that they have almost let pass the last
opportunity they are ever likely to have of setting it right. They have
allowed what once was indignation against particular wrongs, to harden
into a passionate determination to be no longer ruled on any terms by
those to whom they ascribe all their evils. Rebellions are never really
unconquerable until they have become rebellions for an idea.”51

Nevertheless, despite the inflamed sense of Irish nationality. Mill
desires that the two countries should remain united. Their affairs are
intimately intertwined in trade, population movements, and international
security. Geography makes it easier for them to exist within one state
rather than two. But the imperative condition for doing so successfully
is that English rulers radically change their attitude towards Ireland.
In making laws for that island they must resolve to recognize Irish
circumstances and satisfy Irish interests no less than their own.

In particular, Mill argues, they should introduce sweeping agrarian
reforms, leaving Irish peasants in permanent possession of their land,
subject to fixed charges. In 1867, he told a correspondent that his
guiding principle was: “To declare openly on all suitable occasions that
England is bound either to govern Ireland so that Ireland shall be
satisfied with her government, or to set Ireland free to govern
herself.”52 He still hoped that it would be unnecessary to apply to
Ireland the principle of one state for one nation, but, if English
rulers failed in their duty, this would be inescapable.

Mill’s association of nationality with the idea of democratic and free
government has held a prominent place in the literature of modern
nationalism. Koppel S. Pinson asserts that Representative Government,
translated into the language of subject nationalities, “had a tremendous
influence on Edition: current; Page: [xlv] the shaping of nationalist
ideology.”53 Mill seems to have less fear than Lord Acton that a sense
of nationality fosters political forces hostile to democracy, although
he did see the danger in multi-national states where anti-liberal
governments may play off one nationality against another. In such a
state, Mill believes, an army composed of different nationalities could
readily be the executioner of liberty (548). For this reason he prefers
whenever feasible the uni-national state, confident that it gives richer
promise for free government.

Even in a uni-national state, however, a spirit of aggressive
nationality may destroy democratic liberties whenever the power and
prestige of the nation are threatened. A nationalist is not necessarily
a liberal or a democrat. He may support any form of government that
satisfies the ambition and interests of his nation. On this matter Mill
attempts no direct argument, but from the nature of his general
philosophy we can deduce his views. Primarily concerned as he is with
individual liberty and human progress, he nowhere suggests that the
claims of nationality are superior to those of liberalism.


Federalism

Mill’s chapter on federal government has been less influential and
significant than that on nationality. Federalism he extols as an
invaluable instrument to achieve a larger and more fruitful
collaboration in defence and social development between communities
endowed with many mutual interests, but separately weak and often
absorbed in petty rivalries. He discusses with acumen the conditions
necessary to render a federation acceptable and feasible, the different
modes of organizing it, the institutions such as a supreme court
essential to fulfil its purposes, and the broad beneficial consequences
flowing from its success. In federal states he sees decisive advantages
similar to those conferred by other practical modes of co-operation
wherein persuasion replaces command and for certain purposes the weak
meet on equal terms with the strong. For him in some degree the federal
principle is implicit in every truly free state.

Although most of Mill’s remarks are hardly less relevant today than when
he wrote, he was clearly handicapped by the paucity of existing
federations from which to draw illustrations, the only two of importance
being the United States and Switzerland. This fact partly explains his
conclusion that a federal government had inadequate authority to conduct
effectively any war except one in self-defence. In the American case he
had some evidence to support this opinion, but scarcely sufficient on
which to rest a firm and enduring generalisation. Hence, although his
principal remarks on federalism Edition: current; Page: [xlvi] reflect
shrewd intuitions, he lacked adequate data for the full play of his
characteristically empirical thinking. He made no attempt to probe the
history of federal ideas in such thinkers as Jean Bodin and the German
jurists. His chief inspiration and guidance came directly from the
American Federalist Papers and the wealth of American practical
experience. He looked to concrete political experiments as a guide.
Writing on the eve of the Civil War he thought that American federalism
had already achieved something valuable in limiting the tyranny of
majorities, protecting territorial groups, and creating a judicial
arbiter supreme over all the governments, both state and federal, and
able to declare invalid any law made by them in violation of the
constitution.


The Government of Dependencies

Mill’s chapter on the rule of dependencies draws on his life-long
interest in colonies and empire. As a servant of the East India Company
for thirty-five years, he was constantly preoccupied with imperial
issues. He also became closely associated with those Philosophic
Radicals who in the 1830s advocated colonial reform in general and
systematic colonization in particular: notably Charles Buller, William
Molesworth, Edward Gibbon Wakefield, and the enigmatic Lord Durham.
Wakefield’s seminal if erratic mind fed the group with ideas on the
economics of colonial development. Mill freely admitted his debt to
Wakefield.54 He turned aside from the anti-imperial concepts of his
father and Bentham, expressed in Bentham’s pamphlet Emancipate Your
Colonies. For him the old mercantilist empire was near death, and not to
be mourned, but a renovated and vigorous empire could be established on
the mutual interests of self-governing colonies and the metropolis. This
cause made him actively interested in the National Colonization Society,
launched by Wakefield and his associates to create a new colonial
society on liberal principles, built on British capital and British
labour. The new empire was expected to ensure markets and sources of
supply for Britain and relieve her population pressures, economic
stagnation, and the miseries of an industrial society.55

Mill’s enduring interest in the dependencies, evident in Representative
Government, was heavily indebted to his earlier absorption in the
imperial issues of the 1830s and especially his part in the discussions
provoked by the Canadian Rebellion of 1837-38. He was elated in January
1838 by the Edition: current; Page: [xlvii] appointment of Lord Durham
as High Commissioner and Governor General of British North America,
because this event provided an unparalleled opportunity for the
Philosophic Radicals to prescribe for a critical colonial situation. If
Durham succeeded, the Radical party no less than the Empire would
immediately benefit. Durham took with him to Canada Buller and
Wakefield, both of whom substantially contributed to the contents and
character of the famous report, including its recommendation for
colonial autonomy. Mill for his part promptly employed the London and
Westminster Review to defend Durham and his mission.56 From this action
he derived unusual satisfaction, telling a friend in 1840 “that, as far
as such things can ever be said, I saved Lord Durham—as he himself, with
much feeling, acknowledged to me. . . .”57

In 1861 his praise of Durham’s Report remained confident and forcible.
It began, he wrote, “A new era in the colonial policy of nations” and
remained an imperishable memorial to its author’s courage, patriotism,
and liberality, as well as to the intellect and sagacity of his
associates Wakefield and Buller (563). Such a generous assessment was
far from acceptable to all the contemporary Radicals, Roebuck in
particular was forthright in criticizing Durham, especially for his
contemptuous attitude to the French Canadians and their nationality.
Although Mill praised Durham’s Report for advocating the general
principle of colonial autonomy, he nowhere subjects it to a detailed and
public analysis or meets the legitimate criticisms lodged against it at
the time, especially those directed against the apparent
impracticability of the formal terms for colonial autonomy.58

In the wake of triumphant free trade in Britain and responsible
government in Canada certain members in the Liberal camp were openly
hostile to colonies and empire. Spokesmen for the Manchester School and
a few veteran Benthamites, like Place, wrote of colonies as expensive
and needless encumbrances. Since trade was everywhere free or becoming
so, the burdens and perils of a permanent colonial connection were
unacceptable. The most polished and influential exponent of this view
was Goldwin Smith, Regius Professor of Modern History at Oxford, who in
The Empire argues that the self-governing colonies contribute nothing to
Britain, and threaten to involve her in conflicts with other major
powers.59 Mill rejects Smith’s thesis. In Edition: current; Page:
[xlviii] Representative Government he contends that Britain and her
colonies had so many interests in common that a severance of formal ties
would be a mistake (565-6). The empire could survive by consent. For him
colonization, despite its numerous problems, is justified by its
ultimate and enduring benefits. The imperial society preserves peace
among its scattered territories, pursues a civilizing mission, furnishes
an opportunity for invaluable co-operation between young communities and
the mature metropolis, and helps to keep their markets open to one
another, immune from exclusion by hostile tariffs. On the last point
Mill reflects a sanguine belief, then current among British Liberals,
but soon shattered by events, that the free trade so recently introduced
must naturally appeal to the overseas segments of empire.

Mill moreover considered that a continuance of imperial ties augmented
the moral stature and influence of Britain in the councils of the world.
In a special expression of national pride he lauds Britain as the power
that best understands liberty, and that in dealings with foreigners is
more responsive to conscience and moral principle than any other great
nation (565). Such qualities were consonant with his deep respect for
the imperial links. In 1862 he wrote to his friend, John E. Cairnes:

. . . I think it very undesirable that anything should be done which
would hasten the separation of our colonies. I believe the preservation
of as much connexion as now exists to be a great good to them; and
though the direct benefit to England is extremely small, beyond what
would exist after a friendly separation, any separation would greatly
diminish the prestige of England, which prestige I believe to be, in the
present state of the world, a very great advantage to mankind.60

Although he favoured the maintenance of the colonial connection, Mill
rejected as unrealistic the idea of a federation of Britain and its
colonies, which was then occasionally mooted, especially in the form of
direct colonial representation in the parliament at Westminster:

Countries separated by half the globe do not present the natural
conditions for being under one government, or even members of one
federation. If they had sufficiently the same interests, they have not,
and never can have, a sufficient habit of taking counsel together. They
are not part of the same public: they do not discuss and deliberate in
the same arena, but apart, and have only a most imperfect knowledge of
what passes in the minds of one another. They neither know each other’s
objects, nor have confidence in each other’s principles of conduct.

(564.)

The conditions essential for a genuine federation did not exist, and to
assume otherwise would be folly. As late as January, 1870, Mill
expressed similar views to a friend in New Zealand.61

Edition: current; Page: [xlix]
Mill advocated, however, one proposal designed to consolidate the sense
of imperial unity. He would open the public service in all departments
and in every part of the empire on equal terms to the inhabitants of the
colonies. He commended his old radical friend Sir William Molesworth for
setting an excellent example in appointing Francis Hincks, a Canadian
politician, to the governorship of a West Indian Island (566).

In the concluding pages of his chapter on dependencies Mill presents his
mature opinions on governing India. In his last years as a high official
of the East India Company he had taken a significant part in the
struggle against the company’s extinction by the British parliament, and
in the preparation of several papers, two being of major importance:
Report on the Two Bills now Before Parliament Relating to the Government
of India and Memorandum on the Improvements in the Administration of
India during the Last Thirty Years.62 He saw India as an immense
tradition-bound land with many and vast disparities, acute problems,
widely conflicting cultures and religions, and hence as unfit for
immediate self-rule.63 Nowhere does he suggest a willingness to apply
the full teachings of Liberty and Representative Government to the India
of his day. Instead he believed that it needed for a prolonged period
enlightened governance by those with high administrative competence and
a profound grasp of its special difficulties. In his opinion the best
available vehicle under the Crown for applying sound utilitarian
principles was the East India Company, with its large and unique stock
of knowledge and experience. More effectively than any other institution
the Company could act as a trustee and guardian for the Indian people.

In 1834 the Company had concluded its role as trader. Henceforth the
welfare of subjects, rather than the dividends of shareholders, was its
paramount concern. In 1858, however, parliament transferred the
Company’s ruling authority directly to the Crown, to be exercised by a
Secretary of State, responsible to parliament and advised by a Council
of India sitting in London. In Representative Government Mill criticized
this fundamental change on the ground that a British politician would
usually be ignorant of the country, seldom hold office long enough to
acquire an intelligent grasp of the subject, and naturally be more
responsive to considerations of party advantage in Britain than of
social progress in India (573). Since a Secretary of State must
constantly be answerable to the British people, his authority could
hardly serve the best interests of Indians, whom he was unable to see,
hear, or know, and whose votes he had no need to solicit. The parliament
and public to which he was accountable were even less likely Edition:
current; Page: [l] than himself to understand Indian affairs. In its
ignorance it would be unable to judge whether and to what extent he
abused his powers.

Mill admits that any system whereby one people attempts to rule another
is defective, for alien rulers usually misjudge and despise subject
populations; they do not and cannot feel with the people. But political
systems differ in the amount of wrong they commit. He feared that in
1858 Britain had selected the worst possible system (573). So intense
were his convictions that he twice refused an invitation to serve on the
new Council of India.

A major issue confronting the British in India was to formulate proper
policies for education, language, and culture, and at the India House
Mill had to deal with these. He witnessed with disapproval the attempt
of Lord Bentinck and Thomas Macaulay to downgrade the study of Oriental
languages and philosophy and exalt that of English literature, thought,
and science. Bentinck and Macaulay desired to impose on India an
unmistakable English image, and in particular emphasized the necessity
of useful knowledge. On these matters Mill followed a moderate course,
free from much of the dogmatism of his father and utilitarian friends.
He thought that education for Indians as for Englishmen should foster
the self-development and social progress integral to his concept of
liberty. Since the state must play a positive part in promoting the
country’s material advances, an educated Indian élite must be developed,
who would help the English to govern India, interpret western ideas to
its many millions, create equality under the law, eradicate racial
discrimination, and establish a foundation for the society’s material
and intellectual progress. In principle Mill opposed any aggressive
cultural imperialism, such as attempts to discard India’s scholarship
and ignore its learned class.64 He saw no reason for Indians to jettison
their entire cultural tradition and inheritance and doubted that they
could be induced to do so. Their vernacular languages must be respected
and cultivated as the indispensable means whereby the bulk of the people
could assimilate useful ideas from Britain and Europe. He had little
sympathy for missionaries who wanted to proselytize India or impose
practices repugnant to the religious feelings of its people (570).

Mill was confident that Britain had conferred on India solid benefits,
including greater peace, order, and unity under law than the country had
ever enjoyed before and than any native despot seemed able to ensure. It
had introduced the vitalizing influence of highly trained and competent
administrators who furthered social progress and prepared for the time,
Edition: current; Page: [li] however remote, when India would rule
itself. Although Mill accepted the superiority of British culture, he
denied that cultural differences were due to racial differences. A
variety of influences, such as education, state enactments, and special
social and historical circumstances were more important than race.
Nowhere is he more explicit on this subject than in his Principles of
Political Economy: “Of all vulgar modes of escaping from the
consideration of the effect of social and moral influences on the human
mind, the most vulgar is that of attributing the diversities of conduct
and character to inherent natural differences.”65 Donald Winch reminds
us that Mill shared this view with other members of the liberal and
classical school of political economy, who derived it from
eighteenth-century thinkers.66 They assumed that human nature was the
same wherever found and that it could always be elevated in the scale of
civilization by effective government and assiduous education. They also
assumed that it was Britain’s inescapable obligation to accomplish this
goal in India.


“ON LIBERTY”: INDIVIDUAL, SOCIETY, AND STATE

The relations between individual, society, and state is a theme
constantly pursued throughout Mill’s writings, a theme which achieves a
special and impressive focus in On Liberty, a classic much misunderstood
and the most controversial of all his works.67 Mill’s broad aim is to
establish the primacy of the individual and the freedom essential for
the abundant growth of his inherent powers. This task, as he conceived
it, was compelling because of the circumstances in a critical age of
transition, which witnessed the emergence Edition: current; Page: [lii]
of democracy, improved and enlarged media for expressing opinions, the
threatened tyranny of the majority, and the active presence of reformers
like Auguste Comte hostile to the principle of individual liberty.

In no sense is On Liberty isolated from Mill’s other writings. It
selects, refines, and develops certain elements from earlier essays that
advocated religious tolerance, free discussion for testing ideas and
sifting truth from error, and a free press to promote public
enlightenment and responsible government. Early friendships and
associations, especially those with Thomas Carlyle, Alexis de
Tocqueville, the Saint-Simonians, and notably Harriet Taylor, influenced
his conceptions of freedom.68 So pervasive indeed in his own opinion was
the intellectual assistance and guidance of his wife that he regarded
her as virtually a joint author. Some commentators, most notably
Gertrude Himmelfarb, attribute to Harriet’s persuasion certain
divergences in Mill’s ideas from those he earlier expressed. In
addition, the social environment, Britain’s flexible constitution, and
the general moods and attitudes of the country in the middle of the last
century exerted on this book a subtle and profound influence. It is easy
to agree with Noel Annan that Mill’s On Liberty rests on the unconscious
assumption that the British Navy ruled the seas and no fifth column
could take root in England, the only major power in Europe where
pacifism was then able to flourish.69 It rests also on Mill’s supremely
confident faith in man’s rationality.

In the introduction Mill remarks that his object

is to assert one simple principle, as entitled to govern absolutely the
dealings of society with the individual in the way of compulsion and
control, whether the means used be physical force in the form of legal
penalties, or the moral coercion of public opinion. That principle is,
that the sole end for which mankind are warranted, indirectly or
collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their
number, is self-protection. That the only purpose for which power can be
rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community, against
his will, is to prevent harm to others. His own good, either physical or
moral, is not a sufficient warrant.

(223.)

This general formula is supplemented by an argument that the
independence of an individual in whatever concerns merely himself should
be absolute. From the outset the broadness of this formula made it
subject to varied interpretations. For Mill it implies an individual
utility, since liberty is an unfailing source of personal development,
and also a social utility, since ultimately society must benefit from
whatever sustains a diverse and rich individual life. Progress for all
depends on liberty for each.

Edition: current; Page: [liii]
The chief terms of Mill’s liberty are inapplicable either to children or
to undeveloped societies where free and equal discussion is not
feasible. His liberal principle is thus not an absolute ethic,
irrespective of time or place, but related to changing circumstances
affecting the conduct of man as a progressive being (224). Despotism
rather than liberty is a legitimate rule for primitive societies,
provided it aids their development to the ultimate stage where they can
benefit from liberty. The appropriate domain of liberty comprises that
of conscience, thought, opinion, and all the tastes and pursuits of an
individual pursuing his own good in his own way and at his own risks.
Included also are voluntary combinations of individuals for purposes
involving no harm to others.

In Mill’s argument for liberty certain elements merit special emphasis.
His initial and main interpretation of the concept is in the British
empirical tradition, which equates liberty with an absence of external
coercion over an individual’s thought and activity. Men are free when
they can act according to their desires (294). Their liberty consists in
expressing views they want to express and doing what they want to do
without injuring others. To such liberty the principal threat has
hitherto come from unresponsible and despotic governments, which to
satisfy their own ambitions and interests encroached on the customary
areas of individual liberty. Hence the early liberal movement sought to
resolve the conflict between authority and liberty by making rulers
accountable to the people through constitutions and bills of rights.
These endeavours brought to Western Europe a major era of political
liberalism and democracy, which people hoped would foster their
interests and protect their liberties. At the outset Mill shared their
hopes, but, influenced partly by Tocqueville and American experience, he
soon perceived in democracy an implicit element of tyranny—that of the
majority, or those who accepted themselves as the majority threatening
the liberties of individuals and minorities (218-19).

He also saw that increasingly in the democratic age the chief menace to
liberty is derived, not from public officials and the penalties of law,
but from society itself through the inescapable pressures of social
usage, popular prejudice, and public opinion. Society, in exercising
power, executes its own mandates and over the individual asserts a
pervasive compulsion hardly less relentless and even more capricious
than that of law. “In our times.” Mill writes in his third chapter,
“from the highest class of society down to the lowest, every one lives
as under the eye of a hostile and dreaded censorship” (264). Under such
strict public surveillance individuals and families shape their conduct
less by what they think it ought to be than by what the circumstances of
the society seem to demand. Their inclination is to conform with custom,
public opinion, and established norms. They become lost in the crowd:
“by dint of not following their own nature, they have no nature Edition:
current; Page: [liv] to follow” (265). In the modern state mass emotions
have a larger opportunity for expression and dominance. To Mill this
fact undermines the opportunity for variety in man’s nature and
originality in his thinking.70 Hitherto the human race had benefitted
immensely from men of genius who had rendered progress possible. He
feared, however, that the emergence of mass domination would destroy the
atmosphere of freedom and tolerance necessary for a lonely genius to
develop and exert influence.

The ultimate phase of social tyranny occurs when the majority desert or
renounce liberty by failing to make judgments and choices. They thus
frankly “do not desire liberty, and would not avail themselves of it”
(267). As individuals they lose the capacity to determine their own
fate. In his Autobiography Mill saw this as a degeneration of society
“into the only despotism of which in the modern world there is real
danger—the absolute rule of the head of the executive over a
congregation of isolated individuals, all equals but all slaves.”71

Fears about current social tendencies explain the fervour with which
Mill formulated a plan to protect men from what seemed to him a dismal
fate. Rules of conduct must encourage the individual to explore
abundantly the ends and qualities of life to his own advantage and that
of mankind. In Chapter ii he extols liberty to exchange ideas as
cardinal to other liberal values. It enables a society to know and to
reform itself. “Wrong opinions and practices gradually yield to fact and
argument” (231). Mill rejects out of hand the claim made in some nations
that a government is entitled to interfere with a free press when the
public so demands (229). The best government is no more entitled than
the worst either to dictate or silence opinion. Although for him freedom
of discussion is not a natural right, it is a supreme priority in the
life of a progressive society.

This freedom provides, not merely protection against tyrannical and
corrupt rulers, but helps also to foster understanding among citizens
about themselves and their society, to resolve social conflicts, and to
establish truth as the ideal if elusive aim of human inquiry. Mill
assumes that the collision of adverse opinions is an instrument of
enlightenment. Truth may suffer from silencing a single dissenter.
“Complete liberty of contradicting and disproving our opinion, is the
very condition which justifies us in assuming its truth for purposes of
action; and on no other terms can a being with human faculties have any
rational assurance of being right” (231). This hopeful view was not
supported by all his contemporary adherents. Leonard Edition: current;
Page: [lv] Courtney doubted that truth was to be found half-way between
two anti-thetical theories. Such a doctrine might be a plausible weapon
in combatting dogmatism, but “its value ceases when from a sword of
offence and controversy it is beaten into a ploughshare of peace and
domestic economy.”72

The opinions Mill confidently expressed on the virtues of free
discussion were not those he had hitherto invariably approved. Nor did
they contain reservations one might expect him to make. In the 1830s in
“The Spirit of the Age,” in “Civilization,” and in “Coleridge,” he
confessed fears about unlimited free debate.73 He then doubted that
magnifying discussion would necessarily magnify political wisdom or
strengthen public judgment, especially when it affected the fundamental
principles underlying the authority of the national state. He believed
that it was the quality, rather than the quantity, of discussion that
counted. In 1833 he told Carlyle: “I have not any great notion of the
advantage of what the ‘free discussion’ men, call the ‘collision of
opinions,’ it being my creed that Truth is sown and germinates in the
mind itself, and is not to be struck out suddenly like fire from a flint
by knocking another hard body against it. . . .”74

These reservations are explained by differences in time and
circumstances. Mill’s ruling ambition was to be a philosopher-teacher
for the British public. Under different circumstances and in different
periods he frankly bared his mind on important matters, but what he
wrote sometimes failed to coincide with what he said when circumstances
and his own thinking were different. This variance is particularly
evident in his treatment of free discussion in relation to authority,
where he leaves many questions unanswered. Yet there is no ignoring the
firmness of his convictions and assurance of his language in Chapter ii
of On Liberty. However inconsistent with earlier writings, it clearly
reads as his genuine and unamended testament.

In the third chapter Mill argues on lines parallel to those in the
second. In one he contends for freedom of discussion to discover social
truth and in the other for liberty of action to achieve a vital
individuality. In some respects this is the most distinctive part of his
essay, because the concept of individuality contributes to his
liberalism a more original and more contentious element than the older
and long-extolled liberty of speech. His great liberal forbears, like
Milton and Locke, never attempted to annex so large Edition: current;
Page: [lvi] and uncertain a territory for the free and autonomous self.
Mill’s argument adds a dimension to his view of an open society, and
reflects his debt to the German, Wilhelm von Humboldt, whose words form
the epigraph to this essay.75 From Humboldt Mill takes the precept that
men must direct their efforts to the “individuality of power and
development,” including a necessary scope for freedom and variety in
human life (261).

When he describes human development as strictly synonymous with the
cultivation of individuality he reflects Humboldt’s spirit. The
potential aggregate of qualities in the individual must be fostered as
an antidote to the ills of a drab social uniformity, whereby people are
cast in the same mould. As an innovative force individuality is assumed
to express itself in a ready originality, in differences of conduct and
practice, in diverse displays of spontaneity and energy, and in distinct
styles of living. Indeed, Mill believes that eccentricity in itself is
significant in helping to destroy the yoke of mass attitudes and
opinions. He assumes that “Eccentricity has always abounded when and
where strength of character has abounded; and the amount of eccentricity
in a society has generally been proportional to the amount of genius,
mental vigour, and moral courage which it contained” (269). The inventor
and innovator, he thinks, are likely to be regarded by others as
eccentric. In all this Mill fails to admit what Leslie Stephen later
recognized, that eccentricity is not invariably a virtue: it may be
positively bad when it wastes individual energy and expends itself on
trifles.76 A modern critic remarks that Mill “looked to liberty as a
means of achieving the highest reaches of the human spirit; he did not
take seriously enough the possibility that men would also be free to
explore the depths of depravity. He saw individuality as a welcome
release of energy and ingenuity, as if individuals cannot be as
energetic and ingenious in pursuing ignoble ends as noble ones.”77

Mill, however, makes the reservation that men must never undervalue
human tradition and experience: “it would be absurd to pretend that
people ought to live as if nothing whatever had been known in the world
before they came into it; as if experience had as yet done nothing
towards showing that one mode of existence, or of conduct, is preferable
to another” (262). Yet it was imperative that they should be free to
interpret experience in their own way and according to their own
circumstances.

In supporting his plea for individuality Mill deplores any set of
beliefs, like that of Calvinism, which in his opinion views human nature
as corrupt and self-will as a source of evil. Strict Calvinism, by
inculcating rigid submission Edition: current; Page: [lvii] to the will
of God, thereby numbs the independence of the individual (265). Mill
does not extol obedience over will and self-denial over self-assertion.
He finds more attractive the Greek ideal of self-development, which
recognizes human nature as suitable for purposes other than merely
abnegation. He is particularly disturbed by the tendency of modern
creeds to consolidate into a massive uniformity all that is distinctly
individual instead of fostering it within bounds set by the rights and
interests of others.

For the remainder of this chapter Mill continues to praise the merits of
the distinct individual, whose development confers immeasurable benefits
on the human race: “whatever crushes individuality is despotism, by
whatever name it may be called, and whether it professes to be enforcing
the will of God or the injunctions of men” (266). He fears that to its
own loss society is getting the better of individuality. More active
life in individuals would mean more real life in the mass. Those endowed
with originality and genius can help their fellows to reduce the
deadening ascendency of mediocrity. Mill evidently here, in contrast to
what he says elsewhere, trusts the capacity of the average man to
recognize and accept the initiative of the gifted (267).

In the last two chapters of his essay he examines how his libertarian
principle may be reasonably interpreted and applied. In limited space he
tried to explore a vast subject with wide moral and social
ramifications. To make this endeavour manageable he attempts to assign
one part of life to individuality and another to society, a venture in
logic that creates difficulties and confusions which critics have long
stressed. It is not feasible in this introduction to traverse the wide
range of the argument. But it may be useful to note some instances where
he applies his principle to concrete human situations: to the indulgence
of an individual in alcohol, drugs, and gambling; to the provision of
education; to economic life; and to the governance of the state.

Mill’s preference is to leave the individual free to exercise autonomy
in all matters concerning his personal life, since presumably he knows
better than anyone else his own wants and needs. But he admits that to
do so poses difficult problems, because no man is isolated from society.
An individual, for example, should be free to consume alcoholic
beverages according to his inclination, even though he becomes drunk. He
should not be punished by society for intoxication in itself, but only
if it has ill consequences for others. A soldier or a policeman must
certainly be punished for drunkenness on duty, for thus he commits an
other-regarding act of positive or potential peril to his fellow
citizens. Where others drink to excess and harm themselves and their
families, they should at least be subject to moral disapprobation, and
in some circumstances to legal penalties. In general, whenever personal
vices lead to acts injurious to others, these must be taken from the
realm of liberty and made subject either to morality or to law.

Edition: current; Page: [lviii]
Mill comments on the gravity of the issues:

If protection against themselves is confessedly due to children and
persons under age, is not society equally bound to afford it to persons
of mature years who are equally incapable of self-government? If
gambling, or drunkenness, or incontinence, or idleness, or
uncleanliness, are as injurious to happiness, and as great a hindrance
to improvement, as many or most of the acts prohibited by law, why (it
may be asked) should not law, so far as is consistent with
practicability and social convenience, endeavour to repress these also?
And as a supplement to the unavoidable imperfections of law, ought not
opinion at least to organize a powerful police against these vices, and
visit rigidly with social penalties those who are known to practise
them?

(280-1.)

Such measures in no way prevent the flowering of individuality or cramp
new and venturesome experiments in personal living. They merely deal
with practices long condemned by the judgment of the world. Alcohol also
affects another issue on which Mill has strong views: temperance
societies sought to reduce the consumption of liquor by prohibiting its
sale. Drinking is mainly a private matter, whereas selling is a social
act. Any interference with sales would, in Mill’s opinion, violate the
liberty of prospective buyers and consumers. But the campaign for
prohibition was supported by those who alleged that their social rights
were violated by merchants who trafficked in liquor. In the transient
victories of American temperance societies Mill, with much indignation,
finds a classic example of pressure groups which ignore the liberty of
others in using the machinery of democracy to achieve their own ends
(287-8). He likewise rejects sabbatarian legislation, which also
reflects the religious prejudices of a part of the population who coerce
the remainder into its acceptance.

Liberty, Mill remarks, is often granted where it should be withheld, and
withheld where it should be granted (301). Education is an example. When
he wrote it was still common, in the name of liberty, for a father to
have exclusive power to determine the instruction of his children, a
practice Mill criticises as unjust. For him it is self-evident that a
nation has a major stake in the welfare of its children, whether rich or
poor. It must, in particular, ensure that they are all educated up to a
prescribed standard, that parents guarantee they reach this, and that
the costs for educating the poor are publicly defrayed.

Mill, because of his rationalism, has an extravagant confidence in
education as a meliorative force, including it with population control
as one of two major remedies for existing social ills. Yet he repudiates
the idea that the state should provide instruction. Here he apparently
makes a concession to parents who for many reasons, usually religious,
hold diverse views on the substance of education and the values it
should inculcate. In any case, however, he has his own pronounced reason
for rejecting state instruction. Edition: current; Page: [lix] He fears
it as a ready instrument for moulding citizens to be exactly alike, thus
shattering his ambition for the proper cultivation of individuality. A
common mould would be created for the convenience and advantage of the
dominant power, whether an absolute monarch, a priesthood, an
aristocracy, or a majority in a democracy. “An education established and
controlled by the State,” he writes, “should only exist, if it exists at
all, as one among many competing experiments, carried on for the purpose
of example and stimulus, to keep the others up to a certain standard of
excellence” (302). To this rule he makes one exception: if the society
is so backward and impoverished that citizens cannot afford a proper
education, then the government must provide it.

In On Liberty Mill attempts no extensive discussion of liberty in
economic life, for he had already treated it at length in his Principles
of Political Economy, first published in 1848 and revised four times
before 1859, when On Liberty appeared. But he makes clear his attachment
to the concept of a free market. It was once, Mill observes, the
responsibility of governments to fix market prices and regulate
manufacturing processes (293). But long experience has demonstrated that
the quality, quantity, and cheapness of goods are best achieved by a
free market of buyers and sellers, from which society in general
benefits even though some individuals suffer. This basic concept of the
market as an instrument of liberty he tries to preserve, even in such
commodities as alcohol and poisons which can be abused or put to
destructive purposes.

He recognizes, however, that no less firmly rooted in experience is the
need for the state at times to interfere in the market process to secure
among other things a balance of public and private interests, prevention
of fraud, exposure of adulteration in food, and protection of workers in
dangerous occupations. Mill adheres to the idea of the free market
except when the results are obviously bad; then he approves of
intervention, permitting expediency to replace liberty. For him it is
usually better to leave people alone than to control them, but at times
it is imperative to control them in the general interest.

From the late 1840s Mill’s interest in state intervention was greatly
strengthened by the compelling influence of events, the impoverished
plight of Ireland in the famine years, its continuing and baffling land
problem, the critical social issues of industrial Britain, the explosion
of Chartism, and above all the French Revolution of 1848 and the
emergence of the socialists with proposals for profound changes. The
revolution in Paris struck Mill with the same forcible effect as the
earlier events of 1830. Less than a week after the proclamation of the
French Republic in February 1848 he writes to Henry S. Chapman: “I am
hardly yet out of breath from reading and thinking about it. Nothing can
possibly exceed the importance Edition: current; Page: [lx] of it to the
world or the immensity of the interests which are at stake on its
success.”78

What most impressed Mill in the revolution was the effectiveness of the
socialists in raising the issue of a government’s role in economic and
social life, especially in reducing economic inequalities which breed
bitter dissension and undermine the stability and security of the state.
He was convinced that in both England and France private property was so
seriously threatened that ways had to be found to remedy existing
abuses. This aspect of his reformist ideas is reflected in successive
editions of his Principles of Political Economy, notably the third in
1852. Although he rejects certain elements in the socialist argument he
has more sympathy for it than hitherto. In November, 1848, he writes to
an American correspondent, John Jay: “I have expressed temperately and
argumentatively my objections to the particular plans proposed by
Socialists for dispensing with private property, but on many other
important points I agree with them, and on none do I feel towards them
anything but respect, thinking, on the contrary, that they are the
greatest element of improvement in the present state of mankind.”79

Lord Robbins believes that in a part of his mind Mill had sympathy for
socialism, and in another part was critical. He concludes that Mill was
“unsettled about the fundamental basis of society; in spite of his
belief in progress, he was afraid of the future; he did not feel
confident that he knew where we were going; what is more he did not feel
quite confident that he knew where he wanted us to go.”80 Some may
question whether Mill is as uncertain and negative as Lord Robbins
suggests but, at any rate, his thinking on the issue of socialism
remained in a state of flux. In 1849 he had writen that “Socialism is
the modern form of the protest, which has been raised, more or less, in
all ages of any mental activity, against the unjust distribution of
social advantages.”81 He continues to consider it an invaluable movement
of protest, but doubts that conditions in society are yet suitable to
make it an acceptable substitute for a system of private property.
Considerable moral and educational progress is essential before
socialism is practicable. To a German professor in 1852 he complains of
“the unprepared state of the labouring classes & their extreme moral
unfitness at present for the rights which Socialism would confer & the
duties it would impose.”82

Edition: current; Page: [lxi]
Mill’s increased sympathy for socialism is not evident in On Liberty.
Since this work is strongly intended to foster individuality, it is
perhaps hardly to be expected that it would pay tribute to the
collectivist idea. In the last part of the essay he summarizes his
principal objections to government intervention, apart from cases where
it is intended to protect the liberty of individuals (305-10). He
opposes it in matters which can be managed more effectively by private
individuals than by the government, because they have a deeper interest
in the outcome. He also opposes it when individuals may be less
competent than public servants, but can acquire an invaluable public
education in providing the service. Thus they strengthen their
faculties, their judgment, and their grasp of joint and diverse
interests that deeply concern themselves and society. He finds examples
of these in jury service, participation in local administration, and
conduct of voluntary philanthropic or industrial activities. Without
such practical experience and education, no people can be adequately
equipped for success in political freedom. It is the role of the central
government, not to engage directly in these activities, but to act for
them as a central depository, diffusing the diverse experience gathered
in the many experiments of civic activity.

For Mill not the least important reason for opposing the undue
intervention of the central government is to avoid the evil of
excessively augmenting its power. The greater this power, the less scope
remains for independent initiative by individuals and groups.

If the roads, the railways, the banks, the insurance offices, the great
joint-stock companies, the universities, and the public charities, were
all of them branches of the government; if, in addition, the municipal
corporations and local boards, with all that now devolves on them,
became departments of the central administration, if the employés of all
these different enterprises were appointed and paid by the government,
and looked to the government for every rise in life; not all the freedom
of the press and popular constitution of the legislature would make this
or any other country free otherwise than in name

(306).

Here certainly is no advocate of a centralized state socialism.

Among the many themes discussed in the final chapter of On Liberty, the
last is bureaucracy. As noted earlier, Mill was a devoted advocate of
recruiting brilliant talent to the British civil service. Although on
this matter he does not alter his views, he argues that in the interest
of political liberty no civil service must monopolize all the
distinguished brains and skills of the nation. He thinks it essential to
ensure outside the service a countervailing intellectual influence, in
no degree inferior to that within, in order to prevent bureaucracy from
dominating the government and stifling intelligent criticism. He fears
for political freedom if the multitude looks exclusively to the
bureaucracy for direction and dictation, or if the able and ambitious
mainly depend on it for personal advancement. Indeed, its own Edition:
current; Page: [lxii] competence is likely to be undermined unless it is
kept, in Mill’s words, under “the watchful criticism of equal ability
outside the body” (308). Otherwise it will fall victim to its
traditional failings: a slavish attachment to rigid rules and a ready
acquiescence in indolent routine. It may also commit errors of a
different kind. Leaders of the corps may pursue half-examined and
over-sanguine ventures of policy that political chiefs too easily accept
and an innocent public too patiently tolerates.

Mill’s argument throughout is shrewd, but couched in general terms. His
dicta on bureaucratic traits appear to have been derived mainly from
what he had learned from the history and experience of European states.
He attributes no specific abuses to the bureaucratic power in either the
United States or Britain. Indeed, his lavish praise for the New England
system of local government and his glowing admiration for American civic
capacity suggest that he is not complaining of bureaucratic ills in the
republic. His obvious intention is to offer a solemn warning that
bureaucracy can imperil the liberty of individuals whenever two
necessary safeguards are absent or neglected: the presence of an alert
and critical public that keeps it under a constant and intelligent
scrutiny; and a wide diffusion of political power throughout the nation,
which enables individuals and groups to be effective elements in the
body politic. For Mill the ills of bureaucracy and centralism are
intertwined and inseparable. The best protection against both is to
ensure the maximum amount of local government consistent with national
unity.


“CENTRALISATION”

Mill carries the themes of centralisation and bureaucracy from On
Liberty into his essay on centralisation which, under the guise of
reviewing the ideas of two French writers, presents an acute comparison
of French and English political thought and institutions. The first of
the authors, M. Odilon Barrot, has opinions readily defined and in
harmony with Mill’s own. A severe critic of the current centralism of
France under Napoleon III, he condemns its confusion of spiritual and
temporal powers, its petty interferences with the privacy of
individuals, and its restrictions on the rights of communes to manage
their local affairs and appoint their local officials. He complains that
the central authority, with an insatiable appetite for power, forbids
the communes to convene their councils without its permission,
prescribes their annual estimates, and compels them at their expense to
employ its own engineers and architects.

Mill readily accepts Odilon Barrot’s criticism of despotic structures
and policies in the Second Empire. To him the elaborate citadel of
centralized power in Paris is repellant. In his review, however, he
deals principally with Edition: current; Page: [lxiii] the wide-ranging
discussions of Dupont-White on individual, state, and centralism.

Writing in a France torn by class warfare and ideological conflict,
Dupont-White assumes that with the evolution of society the selfishness
of individuals and classes becomes sharper and more pervasive, and that
a powerful centralized government is needed to control the
manifestations of friction and conflict. Without it, society is likely
to be dismembered by bitter hatreds. The state, as the chief instrument
of stability and progress, is obligated to protect the weak from the
strong, a task that grows ever larger and more complex with an expanding
industrial society. State interference in economic life, far from being
an evil, is an unavoidable result of social progress and a requisite for
continued progress.

These speculations greatly interest Mill, and with many of the
conclusions he has sympathy. But, as might be expected, he rejects
Dupont-White’s pronounced bias for centralism and his easy faith that it
can always accomplish great things, including a reduction in the natural
inequalities among men. For him the French writer’s convictions serve to
illustrate a sharp contrast between France’s political culture and that
of England and the United States. Frenchmen cling to centralism as a
splendid achievement of the Revolution and a continuing necessity for
the greatness of their country. Those in active politics invariably have
a vested interest in the centralist regime, even when critical of it.
Tocqueville once remarked: “Most of those people in France who speak
against centralisation do not really wish to see it abolished, some
because they hold power, others because they expect to hold it.”83 They
ignore Tocqueville’s testimony, based on studies of England and America,
that decentralized government is an invaluable school of freedom.

Mill’s view of what centralism means for France is clear: it fails to
give adequate scope to the practical enterprise and public spirit of
individuals and groups throughout the nation (582, 601). Private
initiative, compared with that in England, is shackled and weakened by
the excessive interference of government. Mill says of Dupont-White.

Our author, having pointed out many needful things which would never be
done by the mere self-interest of individuals, does not seem to be aware
that anything can be expected from their public spirit: apparently
because public spirit in this form is almost entirely stifled in the
countries with which he is most familiar, by the centralisation which he
applauds. But in our uncentralised country, even such a public want as
that of life-boats is supplied by private liberality, through the agency
of a voluntary association.

(603.)

Among the principal faults of the centralist system in Mill’s opinion is
the massive patronage it creates and the major power that the
bureaucracy Edition: current; Page: [lxiv] constantly exercises at the
expense of popular liberty. A centralized executive, equipped to give or
withhold many favours, dominates the elections and controls the
legislature. It turns the electorate into a vast tribe of place hunters
(608-9). Hence its management of public affairs is difficult to
challenge successfully, except in times of crisis, and then, as in 1830
and 1848, the result is likely to be revolutionary violence. Indeed, an
overcentralized regime may be amenable to no effective check short of
revolution.

Disturbing to Mill is the manner whereby the system fosters a supine
attitude towards officials. French citizens almost universally appear to
tremble before every petty bureaucrat, a circumstance which Mill thinks
makes them incapable of much liberty. “How should they not be slavish,
when everyone wearing a Government uniform . . . can domineer at will
over all the rest . . . ?” (587.) To him it seems evident that hitherto
no French government, whatever its liberal professions, has been able to
divest itself of the exclusive right to be a judge in its own cause.

In drawing a contrast with French practice Mill comments on the greater
degree of genuine decentralization in the institutions and procedures of
the English state, beginning with the parish vestries at the bottom. Not
merely have the local authorities in England provided a training ground
for political skill and initiative, they have also tempered any
tendencies to despotism at either level of government. Local bodies have
considerable independence, but can operate only within the areas
prescribed for them by parliament. Through experience they have
generally learned to conduct themselves with reasonable competence.
Their vitality adds to that of the state in general, whereas in France
the local units are too numerous and too weak to contribute a valuable
balance.

Mill is provoked to discuss the special character of British empirical
collectivism by Dupont-White’s confident case for state interventionism
in France. Englishmen, he asserts, naturally distrust government and any
extension of its powers (609). They employ it only when other means,
especially the free market, fail to achieve what in general the
community wants. National grants for education were adopted only after
private associations for many years had tried their hand and
demonstrated how little they could accomplish. Government regulation of
emigrant ships came only when its absence had created sordid conditions
that became a public scandal. In this instance the free market had
allowed the shipowners to profit from the poverty, ignorance, and
recklessness of emigrants (592). The Poor Law Board was established
after the old laws created a situation no longer tolerable to the
public.

In citing these and other cases Mill on the whole defends the English
conservative temper and attitudes of mind that they reflect. He appears
to believe that a voluntary instrument should usually be tried before
government Edition: current; Page: [lxv] action is attempted. Yet he
also agrees with Dupont-White that the state is obligated to regulate or
supervise whenever large and complicated enterprises are run by
individuals or private corporations. Railways can be built and operated
by private companies, but the state may usefully limit fares, impose
safety rules, protect commercial interests, and insure shareholders
against reckless or fraudulent managers (593). The steady growth of
business directed by individuals and corporations must necessarily
enlarge rather than diminish the regulating activity of modern
government.

Mill shares with Dupont-White the conviction that a growing social
conscience, responding to the ethical requirements of mankind,
significantly augments the activity of government, making it at times
the unpaid agent of the poor and underprivileged. Partly under this
influence the British parliament had regulated the hours of labour,
prohibited the employment of children under a certain age, prevented
employment of women and children in mines, and compelled manufacturers
to maintain in factories those conditions that reduce accidents and
lessen hazards to health. Thus in England a network of practical
arrangements and compromises were fashioned between state and
individual, between state and corporation, and between central and local
authority, with what Mill regarded as salutary consequences for the body
politic and for the kind of liberty he extolled.

It is conspicuous how little formal ideology, least of all an
egalitarian ideology, figured in these developments of the Victorian
age. A year before the publication of On Liberty Mill gave to Giuseppe
Mazzini impressions of his countrymen:

The English, of all ranks and classes, are at bottom, in all their
feelings, aristocrats. They have some conception of liberty, & set some
value on it, but the very idea of equality is strange & offensive to
them. They do not dislike to have many people above them as long as they
have some below them. And therefore they have never sympathized & in
their present state of mind never will sympathize with any really
democratic or republican party in other countries. They keep what
sympathy they have for those whom they look upon as imitators of English
institutions—Continental Whigs who desire to introduce constitutional
forms & some securities against personal oppression—leaving in other
respects the old order of things with all its inequalities & social
injustices and any people who are not willing to content themselves with
this, are thought unfit for liberty.84


CONCLUSION

mill’s writings in the present volume illustrate the wide range of his
political thoughts and insights. He touched on most aspects of political
Edition: current; Page: [lxvi] speculation important in his age,
although his principal interest was the emergence of representative and
democratic government and its implications for the individual. Never
simply a dispassionate analyst, he was constantly engaged in a reform
polemic in harmony with the liberalism that he himself fashioned out of
the ideas of Bentham and his father. His reform proposals were mainly a
concrete product of a conscious effort to revise and interpret
Benthamism in the interests of a broader humanity.

From the perspective of a century it is not difficult to cite the more
salient ideas of Mill’s political thinking. Along with his theory of
liberty he is deeply anxious to elicit and develop in every phase of
government man’s rational faculty. This endeavour is a consistent strand
in his discussions on representative institutions. He wants to see men
governed by reasoned purpose to a far greater extent than they have ever
been in the past, and to this end institutions must be designed. The
paradox in Mill’s position is clear enough. He believes that a majority
should rule, but thinks that only a minority is likely to have the
requisite wisdom. As a reluctant democrat he seeks to select for public
service those few with a cultivated and eminent intelligence. All his
discussions on representation and the franchise are intended to protect
individual and minority interests and ensure the maximum recognition for
educated minds. He assumes that respect for intellectual distinction is
unnatural to the democratic spirit, but in the interest of democracy
everything possible must quickly be done to cultivate it. The act of
voting should be emphasized as a rational decision made by people
determined that reason has to prevail.

No less cardinal in his thought is a related concern for achieving a
balance amongst the powerful and contending interests in the modern
state. To him industrial society appears to be a fierce struggle of
classes and groups for diverse ends. In view of this struggle, democracy
can only provide the best form of government when it is “so organized
that no class, not even the most numerous, shall be able to reduce all
but itself to political insignificance . . .” (467). It must operate in
such a way as to sustain a workable plurality of interests that prevent
the domination of any one over all the others. Much of what he says
about political machinery concerns instruments, often complicated, that
are intended to protect society from the monopoly of power by a single
interest. To the end of his days he remained convinced that the presence
of countervailing interests is essential for the survival of political
liberty.

Less precise and much harder to summarize is Mill’s view of the economic
roles of the contemporary state. On this theme his thinking after 1848
underwent pronounced changes in response to transformations in society
and the currents of European opinion. It was the ethos of his philosophy
to further the full and free development of every human individual. He
doubted, however, Edition: current; Page: [lxvii] whether the existing
industrial society offered the best environment for such development,
since sometimes it failed to permit even the most harsh and exhausting
labour to earn the bare necessaries of life. It fostered inequalities
between groups, gave advantages to some, and imposed impediments on
others. He believed that in existing society remedies for man’s plight
must be sought through a variety of institutions: co-operative
industrial associations might replace the wage system, reformed
proprietorship might replace land monopoly, and restrictions on the
right of inheritance might reduce the general extent of inequality. Many
new and untried instruments of economic control are possible and must be
employed under the direct or indirect initiative of the state.

These and other related ideas put Mill on the road leading to a liberal
and co-operative form of socialism like that championed by the early
Fabians, who indeed built on his thought and were glad to admit their
indebtedness.85 Like him they saw in socialism the economic side of the
democratic ideal and justified it only if it remained democratic. Yet
the extent to which Mill travelled or hoped to travel the road of
socialism remains wrapped in some doubt because he still continued to
believe that in contemporary society private property and the
competitive principle were necessary for effective production and
indispensable for material progress.

It is more accurate to think of him as an empirical collectivist rather
than a socialist, and as such he moved in harmony with the currents of
the time and his own country. For him the new industrial society
demanded extensions in the agenda of government. But he never ceased to
emphasize that in any country the role of government must depend on the
peculiar necessities of its economy and society. Some countries require
more government than others, especially when poor, underdeveloped, and
lacking in the special attitudes and institutions that nourish private
enterprise. Mill abundently illustrated this point in his discussions on
Ireland and India. The major problem of Ireland, for example, was
poverty, the result of bad government over generations, harsh class
domination, and the gross mismanagement of its land. The remedy must be
drastic action by the government to ensure a peasant proprietorship,
which in Mill’s opinion was best able to protect the soil and foster in
the cultivators forethought, frugality, self-restraint, and the other
solid qualities needed for their material progress and welfare. There
was no other stimulus comparable to the ownership of the land by those
who tilled it. The necessary steps proposed by Mill to ensure this end
startled and annoyed the contemporary upholders of the Edition: current;
Page: [lxviii] rights of property because they involved something alien
to English custom, the control of rents by law rather than by market
forces. But for Mill Ireland was not England, and a free market was not
an inflexible dogma. He rejected the idea that English practice should
be a norm for Irish policy. Irish circumstances and the land situation
were such that only state action could remedy them, and bring to the
country order and prosperity.

Mill’s continuing interest in future social change made him aware of the
continental exponents of revolutionary socialism, who dramatically
appeared in 1848 and became enemies of both capitalism and liberalism.
He did not sympathize with either their theories or their methods. The
concept of a dictatorship of the proletariat with the physical force to
assert its claims would obviously conflict with all his long-cherished
principles. He told William R. Cremer, a trade unionist and a one-time
secretary of the British section of the International Working Men’s
Association, that only two situations justified violent revolution:
acute personal oppression and suffering; and a system of government
which does not permit the redress of grievances by peaceful and legal
means. In his opinion neither existed in England,86 nor, we may infer,
in other European countries under genuine constitutional regimes. On
this aspect of his thought there is no equivocation and no uncertainty.

Five years after his comment to Cremer, Mill told Thomas Smith.
Secretary of the International Working Men’s Association of Nottingham,
how much he welcomed the general principles of the Association,
especially its acceptance of goals that he himself had long sought, such
as equal rights for women and protection of minorities.87 But he
strongly cautioned against use of the term “Revolution” in the French
style. For him revolution meant solely a change of government effected
by force. He regretted that the Association relied on the vague French
political language that dealt in abstractions. “It proceeds from an
infirmity of the French mind which has been one main cause of the
miscarriages of the French nation in its pursuit of liberty & progress;
that of being led away by phrases & treating abstractions as if they
were realities. . . .” He feared that these verbal practices and French
ideas would have adverse effects: confuse issues, foster
misunderstanding, and range men under different banners as friends or
enemies of “the Revolution,” without reference to the real worth of
specific measures advantageous to all and accepted by all. In these
views Mill was the liberal empiricist, protesting against an attempt to
establish a revolutionary ideology among British workers. His appeal at
the time would doubtless command Edition: current; Page: [lxix] a ready
response from the bulk of British labour leaders.88 The political
ferment and social convulsions of the 1830s and 1840s were past. By 1867
the British skilled craftsmen had acquired the franchise and at the same
time were busily engaged in the sober task of creating trade unions to
become powerful pressure groups, furthering the material interests of
their members. They also helped to build and sustain in the Liberal
party a political bridge between the workers and the middle class.
During the remainder of the century the Liberal-labour alliance, deeply
influenced by evangelical religion, was to dominate union spokesmen, and
to them Mill’s form of utilitarianism was unquestionably more appealing
than the revolutionary rhetoric and intricate strategies of class
warfare sponsored by Marx and Engels.

Mill’s ideas in time won an impressive position. It is a common and
acceptable verdict that in Victorian England his was the most
influential voice of liberalism. No one else produced so many
substantial and readable texts, running through successive editions, and
supplemented by scores of articles in periodicals and newspapers setting
forth the proper principles of economics and politics in harmony with
liberal philosophy. By the 1860s his authority reached its peak.89 His
writings then appealed to a wide range of readers’ parliamentarians, a
new and growing generation of students in the universities, middle-class
elements in the towns interested in practical reform, and leaders and
spokesmen among the workers. He was not the sole liberal prophet, and
many who read him disagreed with him. On Liberty, for example, produced
a chorus of criticism as well as of praise. Yet for all its
controversial features, it reformulated boldly the problem of freedom in
the environment of the nineteenth century and thus contributed richly to
the contemporary ferment of liberal thinking. It was a distinguished
liberal of the period who wrote that On Liberty “belongs to the rare
books that after hostile criticism has done its best are still found to
have somehow added a cubit to man’s stature.”90

This was the tribute of a devoted disciple, whose thinking was shaped by
Mill. Yet many twentieth-century readers would still endorse it. They
have continued to find enduring value in the tenets of On Liberty. They
cherish almost as much as did John Morley a book that protests against
the infallibility Edition: current; Page: [lxx] of public opinion and
the arrogance of majorities. They accept Mill’s distrust of centralised
power and admire his ideals of individual liberty and a free state,
although they may admit the increased difficulties in achieving them.
They welcome his admonition that liberty and intellectual progress,
insecure and fragile things, demand constant cultivation. But they would
also emphasize that Mill had other valuable thoughts to express outside
the pages of On Liberty. His writings and discussions as a whole must be
considered in any genuine assessment of his worth as a social thinker.
In them one view was conspicuous. He believed that political ideas and
structures must change with a changing society. For him all
institutional arrangements are provisional. If we imagined him living
into the present century, we can conceive him still busily engaged in
revising his liberal thought, in response to altered circumstances and
fresh currents of opinion. He would still be feverishly absorbed in
trying to reach the most reliable balance between his individualist and
collectivist convictions. He would of course remain the rationalist,
confident that social change could be effected by the art of persuasion
and by the simple fact that men would learn from bitter experiences.

Edition: current; Page: [lxxi]


Textual Introduction

JOHN M. ROBSON

the essays in this volume comprise the main body of Mill’s writings
specifically on political and social theory, including On Liberty and
Considerations on Representative Government, his most valued
contributions to this area. Given his abiding interest in the
application of theory to experience, and the testing of theory by
experience, and given also his view of the “consensus” that obtains in
social states, it is impossible to isolate essays that deal only with
political and social theory, or to include in one volume (or even in
several) all his essays that touch on such matters. Perhaps the most
obviously necessary exclusions in a volume of this kind are the final
Books of the System of Logic and the Principles of Political Economy,
both of which are essential to an understanding of Mill’s ideas. The
decision to include or exclude particular essays is in large measure a
pragmatic one, and students of Mill’s political and social thought will
want to refer, inter alia, to some of his essays and newspaper writings
on economics, on particular political and social events, and on law and
equality, which will be found in other volumes of the Collected Works.
The main characteristics determining the selection of the essays in this
volume are the focus on abiding and theoretical questions, and thematic
interdependence.1

While the themes and purposes of these essays show much similarity,
their provenances, comparative weights, and histories are diverse. Two
of them, On Liberty and Considerations on Representative Government, are
separate monographs, the former of which went through, in Mill’s
lifetime, four Library Editions and the latter, three; each also
appeared in often-reprinted inexpensive People’s Editions. Both of these
have, it need hardly be said, earned a lasting place in discussions of
British political thought. Of the other eleven items (excluding the
Appendices), one, Thoughts on Edition: current; Page: [lxxii]
Parliamentary Reform, first appeared as a pamphlet, which went through
two editions and then was republished in Volume III of Mill’s
Dissertations and Discussions; and another is a solicited paper in
support of competitive civil service examinations, which was first
published in Parliamentary Papers and then reprinted as a pamphlet.

The other nine items are articles: one (the earliest) from Tait’s
Edinburgh Magazine; five from the Westminster Review (including three
from the London Review before it merged, in April, 1836, with the
Westminster); two from the Edinburgh Review; and one from Fraser’s
Magazine. Of these nine, three were republished in Dissertations and
Discussions: these are “Civilization” (the only one which is not
actually a review) from the Westminster, the second review of
Tocqueville on democracy in America from the Edinburgh, and “Recent
Writers on Reform” from Fraser’s. Such republication indicates, of
course, the relative importance he attached to these essays,2 and so one
must note that both “Rationale of Political Representation” and the
first review of Tocqueville (both from the Westminster) are represented
in Dissertations and Discussions by the lengthy excerpts that make up
the “Appendix” to Volume I (here reprinted as Appendix B). None of the
others (including the review of Taylor’s Statesman, contributed to the
London and Westminster by George Grote and Mill, which here appears as
Appendix A) was republished by Mill.3

The background, composition, and publishing history of these essays,
spread as they are over Mill’s most active years of authorship, from the
early 1830s to the 1860s, provide valuable insights into his
intellectual history and influence. After he and his father had
virtually severed relations with the Westminster Review in the late
1820s, the younger Mill wrote voluminously for newspapers, especially
the Examiner, and sought out avenues for longer essays, since the major
reviews, the Edinburgh, Quarterly, and Blackwood’s, were closed to him
on political grounds. His main outlet was in the Unitarian Monthly
Repository, but four of his articles, the first of which was his review
of George Cornewall Lewis’s Use and Abuse of Political Terms (the first
essay in this volume), appeared in the short-lived Tait’s Edinburgh
Magazine. His review of Lewis’s book (which he had commented on a month
earlier in the Examiner of 22 April, 1832) shows Edition: current; Page:
[lxxiii] clearly his growing interest in logic,4 particularly in the
language of political and ethical speculation, which came to maturity
not in these essays, but in the System of Logic. Though he does not
refer to the essay in his Autobiography,5 his correspondence indicates
something of his view of his writings at that time. On 23 May, 1832,
Mill wrote to the proprietor of the magazine, William Tait: “Since you
have thought my article worthy of insertion it is very probable that I
may place another or others at your disposal. . . .”6 Six days later, in
a letter to Thomas Carlyle, he refers to this review, along with his
recent writings in the Examiner (including the shorter notice of Lewis’s
book), as probably having no interest for Carlyle, except as coming from
Mill. “On the whole,” he says, “the opinions I have put forth in these
different articles are, I think, rather not inconsistent with yours,
than exactly corresponding to them, & are expressed so coldly and
unimpressively that I can scarcely bear to look back upon such poor
stuff” (EL, CW, XII, 105). Later, however, he returned to the matter in
another letter to Carlyle (12 January, 1834), saying:

Do you remember a paper I wrote in an early number of Tait, reviewing a
book by a Mr. Lewis (a man of considerable worth, of whom I shall have
something more to say yet). That paper paints exactly the state of my
mind & feelings at that time. It was the truest paper I had ever
written, for it was the most completely an outgrowth of my own mind &
character: not that what is there taught, was the best I even then had
to teach; nor perhaps did I even think it so; but it contained what was
uppermost in me at that time and differed from most else that I knew in
having emanated from me, not, with more or less perfect assimilation,
merely worked itself into me.

(Ibid., 205.)

Meanwhile the matter of the review had been in his mind for, in what
must be a reference to the passage on 13 below, he wrote to Tait on 24
September, 1833: “I have not given up the idea of those ‘Essays on the
Ambiguities of the Moral Sciences’ but for the present I see no chance
of my having time for it” (ibid., 179)—again, only in the System of
Logic did he return to this question.

Edition: current; Page: [lxxiv]
Towards the end of the review of Lewis, Mill proposes “a more
comprehensive view” that “would unite all the exclusive and one-sided
systems, so long the bane of true philosophy . . .” (13). This aim is,
of course, a theme he explores most notably in On Liberty; more
particularly, he expressly tried to fulfil it personally in the next few
years, as is shown in the essays he wrote in the 1830s.

“Rationale of Representation,” “De Tocqueville on Democracy in America
[I],” “State of Society in America,” and “Civilization,” the next four
essays in this volume, form a coherent group. The actual circumstances
of their publication give them an evident persuasive purpose that is not
fully consonant with the retrospective account in his Autobiography,
where he says of this period in his development:

If I am asked what system of political philosophy I substituted for that
which, as a philosophy, I had abandoned, I answer, no system: only a
conviction, that the true system was something much more complex and
many sided than I had previously had any idea of, and that its office
was to supply, not a set of model institutions, but principles from
which the institutions suitable to any given circumstances might be
deduced.

(97).

And he adds (98) that he would willingly have taken Goethe’s “device,
‘many-sidedness,’ ” as his own. These comments would seem to apply to
the years just before the founding in 1835 of the London Review, of
which Mill was “the real,” if not “the ostensible, editor”
(Autobiography, 120), and are consistent with his account of his
editorial aims, where “many-sidedness” is implied. It was, however,
predominantly a Radical many-sidedness, and was further limited, as he
indicates, by the need to represent strongly the Philosophic Radicals’
viewpoints, especially those congenial to James Mill. So, the “old
Westminster Review doctrines, but little modified . . . formed the
staple of the review” (ibid.), and, though Mill does not say so, the
party polemic also appears strongly—though not solely—in his own early
articles, most obviously in those, not here included, dealing with
specific political questions, but also in the four here collected. Only
one of them, “Civilization,” it may again be noted, was republished in
full by Mill,7 Edition: current; Page: [lxxv] because, in his own view,
the others suffered from one or more of the characteristics he lists in
the Preface to Dissertations and Discussions: the excluded essays “were
either of too little value at any time, or what value they might have
was too exclusively temporary, or the thoughts they contained were
inextricably mixed up with comments, now totally uninteresting, on
passing events, or on some book not generally known; or lastly, any
utility they may have possessed has since been superseded by other and
more mature writings of the author.”8

Looking at only the last of these characteristics,9 one may say, in
justification of republication, that our view of utility includes an
opportunity to assess the development of the views expressed in the
“more mature writings” here included. At the very least, these essays
were important to Mill when they were written and reveal some of his
attitudes towards contemporary opinions, and also towards the purposes
of a radical review. For example, in a letter of 15 April, 1835, Mill
asked Joseph Blanco White to tell James Martineau, who had offered to
review Bailey’s Rationale of Representation, that “after a good deal of
deliberation among the three or four persons who take most share in the
conduct of the review, it has appeared to us that a subject involving so
directly and comprehensively all the political principles of the review,
should be retained in the hands of the conductors themselves . . .” (EL,
CW, XII, 258; cf. 263).

Alexander Bain says of this article: “Bailey’s view being in close
accordance with his own. [Mill] chiefly uses the work as an enforcement
of the radical creed. After Bentham and the Mills, no man of their
generation was better grounded in logical methods, or more thorough in
his method of grappling with political and other questions, than Samuel
Bailey.”10

Unlike Bailey, an old ally of the Philosophic Radicals, Tocqueville, the
author of the work reviewed in the next article here printed,
represented the new influences flooding in on Mill in this period His
subject, the workings of democracy in the United States, was, however,
of great interest to all British Radicals, who looked to the American
system as a model, either ideal or experimental, on which to found their
arguments for reform. And Tocqueville’s views held special importance,
as coming from a Frenchman with the background of the great Continental
Revolution, the other main foreign topos for political discussion. In
fact, these two exemplars were used by political and social writers of
all shades of blue as well as red.

The great importance to Mill of Tocqueville’s work is brought out in his
Autobiography (115), where he comments on the “shifting” of his
“political Edition: current; Page: [lxxvi] ideal from pure democracy, as
commonly understood by its partisans, to the modified form of it,” set
forth in Considerations on Representative Government. This gradual
change, he says, which began with his reading of Tocqueville, may be
seen by comparing his two reviews of Democracy in America with one
another and with Considerations on Representative Government.

On hearing of Tocqueville’s book from Nassau Senior, Mill initially
offered it, in February, 1835, to Blanco White for review in the second
(July) number of the London Review.11 When he had himself read it,
however, he quickly developed an admiration for it and sought
information about its author, and when in May Blanco White decided not
to write the review, Mill took on the task for the third (October)
number.12 He met Tocqueville later that spring, and began (partly with a
view to securing him as a contributor to the London Review) an extremely
interesting and mutually laudatory correspondence with him that casts
important light on the political and methodological views of both.13

Mill’s esteem, which continued and grew, led to his second review of
Democracy in America in 1840; in the meantime, probably stimulated by
his reading of Tocqueville’s book, he contributed to the next number of
the London Review (January, 1836) a review of five works on the United
States, entitled “State of Society in America.” The particular line of
argument adopted, based on the value of comparative studies of states of
society, reminds one that this was a period of gestation for the last
Book of the Logic, and justifies Bain’s remark that the essay “may be
called one of his minor sociological studies.”14

The next article in this volume, “Civilization,” appeared in the first
number of the amalgamated London and Westminster Review (April, 1836)
and further develops his sociological and cultural themes. In his
Autobiography (121), Mill mentions that his father, then in the final
year of his life, approved of this article, into which, he says, “. . .
I threw many of my new opinions, and criticized rather emphatically the
mental and moral tendencies of the time, on grounds and in a manner
which I certainly had not learnt from him.”15

Edition: current; Page: [lxxvii]
Light on Mill’s reasons for republishing this article in Dissertations
and Discussions is thrown by his comments in a letter to George
Cornewall Lewis two years after its first appearance. There he declines
Lewis’s article on authority in matters of belief because it is “suited
only for students, & not for the public.” Believing now that, as a
“popular periodical,” the London and Westminster should not publish such
essays. Mill says that if this policy had been in effect earlier,
neither his “Civilization” nor his “On the Definition of Political
Economy” would have been published there.16

There are over one hundred and fifty substantive variants between the
first version of this essay and that reprinted below, all but nine of
them introduced in the first edition of Dissertations and Discussions.
(In general, as would be expected, the earlier of the essays in those
volumes were more rewritten by Mill than the later ones: cf. Collected
Works, Vol. X, p. cxxii, and see also Vol. IV, p. xlvi.) Of these
variants, about 15 per cent reflect a change of opinion (often minor),
correction of information, or the passage of time and the altered
provenance; the others are about equally divided between qualifications
(of judgment and tone) and minor verbal alterations (including changes
in capitalization and italicization). Various interesting examples may
be cited, as illustrative of the changes found not only in this essay,
but in others reprinted in Dissertations and Discussions. For instance,
at 131s-s, referring to the “refined classes” in England. Mill in 1835
said: “When an evil comes to them, they can sometimes bear it with
tolerable patience, (though nobody is less patient when they can
entertain the slightest hope that by raising an outcry they may compel
somebody else to make an effort to relieve them).” In 1859 he
substituted this less condemnatory sentence: “The same causes which
render them sluggish and unenterprising, make them, it is true, for the
most part, stoical under inevitable evils.” Sometimes a seemingly minor
variant disguises a significant (if occasionally enigmatic) change, such
as that at 145t, where, describing the place history should play in
education, he said in 1835 that he accorded it importance “not under the
puerile notion that political wisdom can be founded upon it”; this
remark was excised in the republished version a quarter of a century
later. One sentence on 127 will serve to illustrate three different
kinds of change: the first, altered usage over time, the second, a minor
verbal change; and the third, Mill’s typical kind of qualification.
Originally the sentence read: “With Conservatives of this sort, all
Radicals of corresponding enlargement of view, could fraternize as
frankly and cordially as with many of their own friends . . .”; in 1859
“democrats” replaced “Radicals”, “aims” replaced “view” (and the comma
was dropped), and “many” became “most”. The type of variant reflecting
changed provenance and or Edition: current; Page: [lxxviii] passage of
time may be illustrated by those in which attribution is altered, as at
134l-l, where Mill deleted the specific reference in quoting from a
paper by himself, and at 138z-z, where, in the version of 1859, Carlyle
is identified as the source of a comment (cf. the references to Maurice
and Hamilton at 140f-f and 142p-p). Finally, as an example of Mill’s
sensitivity to the unintentionally ludicrous, one may refer to 122t-t,
where the paragraph beginning “Consider the savage” had, in 1835, a more
direct invitation, “Look at the savage” (cf. 122x-x).

The next item in this volume, Mill’s short review of a work entitled
Essays on Government, was not republished, and may here be treated in
brief compass. It appeared in September, 1840, after the termination of
his editorial relation with the Westminster Review (which now dropped
London from its title), but may reflect a commitment earlier entered
into. While slight, it touches on many issues central to radical
politics at the time.

Mill’s separation (not a total severance) from the Westminster in 1840
was of great significance for him, as symbolizing the end of his direct
adherence to the party politics of his youth.17 His last article during
his editorship was the celebrated essay on Coleridge; his first major
essay subsequently was his second review of Tocqueville’s Democracy in
America (now completed), which appeared in that full-throated organ of
Whiggism, the Edinburgh Review, second only to the Tory Quarterly Review
as the target of the early Philosophic Radicals’ excoriating analysis.18
That his switch was for him an end and a beginning is indicated, at
least slightly, by his mention of the second Tocqueville review and its
provenance in the concluding sentence of Chapter v of the Autobiography,
Chapter vi being “General Review of the Remainder of My Life.” The move
(which led to his impressive series of essays on French historians)
caused him some uneasiness, however, as is implied in a letter to
Tocqueville announcing that his review will appear:

When I last wrote to you I lamented that from having terminated my
connection with the London & Westminster Review I should not have the
opportunity of reviewing your book there, but I have now the pleasure of
telling you that I am to have the reviewing of it in the Edinburgh
Review which as you know is much more read, and which has never had a
review of your First Part—I suppose none of the writers dared venture
upon it, and I cannot blame them, for that review is the most perfect
representative of the 18th century to be found in our day, & that is not
the point of view for judging of your book. But I & some others Edition:
current; Page: [lxxix] who are going to write in the Ed. Review now,
shall perhaps succeed in infusing some young blood into it. They have
given me till October for this article.

(EL, CW, XIII, 435: 11/5/40.)

During the interval (1835-40) between the two parts of Tocqueville’s
work, Mill had of course not anticipated his giving up the Westminster
connection, and had been continuing his efforts to get Tocqueville to
contribute to the Review. As early as 1836 he had reconciled himself,
for the moment, to Tocqueville’s not having time to write more than one
article, because his book was absorbing his time: and in January, 1837,
hoping that the London and Westminster would be the first British review
to notice the second part of Democracy in America, he asked Tocqueville
if he could have advance sheets of the work (EL, CW, XIII, 316). When it
finally appeared in 1840, Mill’s anticipations were more than met, and
once more the correspondence is full of mutual esteem.19

When Mill republished this second review in his Dissertations and
Discussions, he interpolated passages from his first review of Democracy
in America20 and added a section from his “Duveyrier’s Political Views
of French Affairs,” which had appeared in the Edinburgh in 1846. While
there are 101 substantive variants in the text between the versions of
1840 and 1859 (nine more appear in the version of 1867),21 few are of
significance on their own. Apart from the kinds illustrated above in the
discussion of “Civilization,” there are two types that deserve mention.
In one type, of more interest to textual than other scholars, there is
evidence of Mill’s preparatory editing: see 163t-t and 164w-w, where a
correction and a tentative rewording are found in Mill’s own copy
(Somerville College, Oxford) of the 1840 article. The other type will
prove of interest to those concerned with nuances and shading in Mill’s
political thought; they are not trivial in cumulative effect, especially
when seen in conjunction with the changes that Mill made in reproducing
Reeve’s translation of Tocqueville (see 162q and the collation of the
translation in the Bibliographic Appendix). Some of these are merely
changes in initial capitalization, but (and the same is true in On
Liberty and Considerations on Representative Government) the hints they
give, in sum, justify their indication in this volume as substantive
Edition: current; Page: [lxxx] variants: see, for example, 170c-c to
f-f, where the words involved are “democracy,” “democratic,” “society,”
and “state.”

The following decade, marked by the publication of Mill’s first
books—the System of Logic (1843), Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of
Political Economy (1844), and the Principles of Political Economy
(1848)—as well as the series of essays on the French historians and many
newspaper articles, saw no separate major articles by Mill on political
and social theory, though those writings contain much material relevant
to these areas. And in the 1850s, the decade of his marriage, he
published very little of any kind, being occupied, with Harriet’s
collaboration, in the composition of many of his later works.

By the 50s, however, Mill was very widely known as a philosopher with
practical interests,22 and so his approbation was solicited by Trevelyan
for the proposed reform of entrance to the civil service. Mill, who was
enthusiastic about the similar reform of 1853 in the Indian civil
service, had already praised the proposal in a letter to his wife,
noting that the “grand complaint” about it was that it would “bring low
people into the offices! as, of course, gentlemen’s sons cannot be
expected to be as clever as low people” (LL, CW, XIV, 147, 175 [2/2/54,
3/3/54]). He was therefore pleased by Trevelyan’s request of 8 March,
1854, to comment on the plan, and in response hailed it as “one of the
greatest improvements in public affairs ever proposed by a government.
If the examination be so contrived as to be a real test of mental
superiority, it is difficult to set limits to the effect which will be
produced in raising the character not only of the public service but of
Society itself.” And he offered to write further in support at a later
time (ibid., 178-9). Gratified at the response by Trevelyan and in the
House of Commons and the press to the announcement of his approval
(ibid., 184, 187-8), he sent the paper here printed as a letter to the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and subsequently yielded, with “great
regret,” to Trevelyan’s request for the softening of the wording of a
sentence concerning religious tests.23

Among the works that Mill wrote in the 1850s,24 with Harriet’s aid, is
the best known of all his writings, On Liberty. In the Autobiography
(144) he says: “I had first planned and written it as a short essay, in
1854. It was in mounting the steps of the Capitol, in January 1855, that
the thought first Edition: current; Page: [lxxxi] arose of converting it
into a volume.” The contemporary evidence, unfortunately, does not quite
bear out this retrospective account. Mill, travelling in southern Europe
for his health from December 1854 till June 1855, wrote almost daily to
Harriet about his thoughts and experiences, and it is clear that the
idea struck him some days before he actually visited the Capitol. He
may, however, be forgiven the attractive, if mistaken, collation of
events. “On my way here [from Viterbo to Rome],” he comments to her on
15 January, 1855, “cogitating” on the effect of the Italian sights in
taking off “my nascent velleity of writing,”

. . . I came back to an idea we have talked about & thought that the
best thing to write & publish at present would be a volume on Liberty.
So many things might be brought into it & nothing seems to me more
needed—it is a growing need too, for opinion tends to encroach more &
more on liberty, & almost all the projects of social reformers in these
days are really liberticide—Comte, particularly so. I wish I had brought
with me here the paper on Liberty that I wrote for our volume of
Essays—perhaps my dearest will kindly read it through & tell me whether
it will do as the foundation of one part of the volume in question—If
she thinks so I will try to write & publish it in 1856 if my health
permits as I hope it will.25

It is very unlikely that Harriet sent the earlier manuscript to him, but
she did approve his turning to the subject, which he said he would
“think seriously about,”26 and, heartened by the effect he believed his
evidence on limited liability in partnerships before a Parliamentary
committee was having, he wrote again to her on the subject:

We have got a power of which we must try to make a good use during the
few years of life we have left. The more I think of the plan of a volume
on Liberty, the more likely it seems to me that it will be read & make a
sensation. The title itself with any known name to it would sell an
edition. We must cram into it as much as possible of what we wish not to
leave unsaid.

(Ibid., 332 [17/2/55].)

The note struck here, of approaching death, is characteristic of his
correspondence with his wife in these years, and explains much of their
attitude towards their self-imposed task of reform through writing.27
The revised plan for a separate volume on liberty did not fit into their
earlier Edition: current; Page: [lxxxii] scheme, which was for a volume
of republished essays and another posthumous volume (or volumes) of new
essays, the latter including the previously composed and briefer
discussion of liberty and the “Life” (that is, what became the
Autobiography).28 The strategy of publication concerned them; Mill,
considering again the collection of republished essays that they had
thought of as early as 1839,29 wrote to his wife: “Above all, it is not
at all desirable to come before the public with two books nearly
together, so if not done now it cannot be done till some time after the
volume on Liberty—but by that time. I hope there will be a volume ready
of much better Essays, or something as good. . . .”30

The period after his return to England in mid-1855 until Harriet’s death
in late 1858 is very thin in evidence about writing, and he published
very little. His responsibilities at the India House increased in 1856
when he became head of the Examiner’s Office, and his intense
involvement in the East India Company’s resistance to the government’s
assumption of full control included the drafting of their petition and
the writing of several pamphlets in which, as Bain says, “he brought to
bear all his resources in the theory and practice of politics.”31
Nevertheless, it is certain that he wrote and rewrote On Liberty during
these years, as well as preparing new editions of his Logic and
Principles. The revision of the latter for its 5th edition (1857) gives
us the best evidence we have that he had worked on the Liberty early in
this period, for he writes to Parker on 16 December, 1856: “I am engaged
about a new book (in one smaller volume [than the Principles]) which I
think I could finish in time for publication in May, and I am not so
certain of being able to do so if I put it aside to revise the Pol.
Economy.”32 He did not, however, finish it then, for he wrote to Theodor
Gomperz on 5 October, 1857, almost a year later, saying: “I have nearly
finished an Essay on ‘Liberty’ which I hope to publish next winter.”
Edition: current; Page: [lxxxiii] And—surely most authors will
sympathize—more than another year went by before he could write to
Gomperz, on 4 December, 1858, to say: “My small volume on Liberty will
be published early this winter” (LL, CW, XV, 539, 581). The arrangement
had just been made with Parker, to whom Mill had offered the book on 30
November, saying: “You can have my little book ‘On Liberty’ for
publication this season. The manuscript is ready; but you will probably
desire to look through it, or to have it looked through by some one in
whom you confide, as there are some things in it which may give offence
to prejudices.”33

The offer was not prompted, however, by a feeling that the manuscript
was finally in its best form; rather, the death of Harriet, on 3
November, 1858, drove Mill to consider it almost as a memorial to her
that should never be altered by revision. As he says in the
Autobiography (144):

During the two years which immediately preceded the cessation of my
official life [in October, 1858], my wife and I were working together at
the “Liberty.” . . . None of my writings have been either so carefully
composed, or so sedulously corrected as this. After it had been written
as usual twice over, we kept it by us, bringing it out from time to time
and going through it de novo, reading, weighing and criticizing every
sentence. Its final revision was to have been a work of the winter of
1858-59, the first after my retirement, which we had arranged to pass in
the South of Europe. That hope and every other were frustrated by the
most unexpected and bitter calamity of her death. . . .

His full account of the work, a few pages later in the Autobiography
(149-52), should be consulted, not only as giving his testimony to his
wife’s importance on this aspect of his thought, but also as revealing
his assessment of its value in the present and the future. He also
comments on the question of the originality of On Liberty,34 and
concludes the account by returning to the circumstances of its
publication. “After my irreparable loss one of my earliest cares was to
print and publish the treatise, so much of which was the work of her
whom I had lost, and consecrate it to her memory. I have made no
alteration or addition to it, nor shall I ever. Though it wants the last
touch of her hand, no substitute for that touch shall ever be attempted
by mine.”35

Edition: current; Page: [lxxxiv]
This promise has been taken at face value, but, as is the case in all of
Mill’s major works, there was some revision, though in this instance
very slight, and not of much consequence. On Liberty went through four
Library Editions, two in 1859, a third in 1864, and a fourth in 1869, as
well as a People’s Edition in 1865 (see n37 below). Only three variants
were introduced in the 2nd edition;36 twenty-eight changes, however,
were made for the 3rd edition. Except for the transposition of two words
(252e-e), none of these involves more than one word, and many are simply
initial capitalization (e.g., of “State” four times on 303-4). One may
mention that the mistake in the title of Comte’s Système de politique
positive (identified as his Traité in the 1st edition) was corrected by
Mill (227c-c). The most important revisions are those such as 242c-c,
where “genuine principles” was changed to “general principles” (and here
perhaps a printer’s error was involved). In the 4th edition only two
minor changes were made, the movement of quotation marks at 234b-b, and
the substitution of “When” for “Where” at 243d-d. In short, Mill’s
statement is not strictly accurate, for there are substantive changes,
but On Liberty is, by a significant margin, the least revised of his
works, and his homage to Harriet is not damaged by the textual evidence.

In spite of its popularity and controversiality, and Mill’s increased
reputation in the 1860s, On Liberty, as mentioned above, after the
issuance of a 2nd edition in the year of first publication, went through
only two further Library Editions (both now rare), in 1864 and 1869. The
explanation is that Mill agreed to the publishing in 1865 of a cheap
People’s Edition of On Liberty (and of his Principles and Considerations
on Representative Government)37 by Longmans (who had taken over Parker’s
business). Edition: current; Page: [lxxxv] Thousands of these
inexpensive copies of On Liberty were sold in the next few years, at a
considerable pecuniary sacrifice resulting from both the low price and
the reduced sales of the Library Edition;38 the accessibility of his
thoughts to a broad and less affluent public clearly more than
compensated him for the sacrifice.

Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform, the next item in this volume, had,
like On Liberty, lain fallow for some years before it appeared in
February, 1859, but, it being a more occasional piece, the timing of its
publication, as of its composition, was determined by political events.
In the Prefatory Note (see 313a below) he says:

Nearly the whole of this pamphlet, including the argument on the Ballot,
was written five years ago, in anticipation of the Reform Bill of Lord
Aberdeen’s Government [in 1854]. The causes which at that period kept
back the question itself prevented the publication of these remarks upon
it Subsequent reflection has only strengthened the opinions there
expressed. They are now published, because it is at the present time, if
ever, that their publication can have any chance of being useful.

As the pamphlet was completed in 1858, the “five years” takes one back
to 1853, and a letter to Harriet of 9 January, 1854, confirms that it
was drafted by then. There Mill refers to an article by W. R. Greg in
the October, 1853, number of the Edinburgh, in which he notes an
extraordinary parallel to the ideas on the ballot expressed in their
“unpublished pamphlet” (LL, CW, XIV, 126). The next reference in the
correspondence, on 24 June, 1854, is to “the political pamphlet that was
to have been” (ibid., 218, to Harriet); the appropriate occasion had by
then gone by, with the withdrawal of the Bill put forward by Russell
during the Aberdeen administration, and another did not arise until
Derby’s proposal of 1859, the expectation of which aroused considerable
discussion. So, even at the height of his grief at Harriet’s death, and
while On Liberty was going through the press, Edition: current; Page:
[lxxxvi] he was able to respond to a suggestion from Chadwick that he
contribute to the debate, referring to the pamphlet “written several
years ago” and now adapted “to the present time” (ibid., XV, 584). The
necessary adaptation, the addition of a suggested plurality of votes for
some electors based on “proved superiority of education,”39 is mentioned
in Mill’s account in the Autobiography (152-3), where he also dwells on
the other two features of the pamphlet that from a Radical point of view
would be viewed as “heresies”40—the rejection of the secret ballot, and
support for minority representation.

Unlike plural voting, the argument against the ballot not only had his
wife’s approval but had originated with her. One piece of inferential
evidence, a revision of the text of the Logic,41 suggests that the
change of opinion (in which, as he says, Harriet preceded him), came as
early as 1851. That she was more eager than he to make known their
abandonment of this part of the Radical credo appears in his letters to
her in June, 1854; indeed. one can easily sense his prudent reserve
about offending allies and giving comfort to enemies.42

Concerning minority representation it is worth noting that, while he
approved of Garth Marshall’s proposal for cumulative votes when Thoughts
on Parliamentary Reform was published (as he had in 1853 when the
pamphlet was drafted), it very quickly lost in importance for him when
Thomas Hare’s scheme for Personal Representation came to his attention.
In his account in the Autobiography (153-5) he indicates that had he
known of it earlier, he certainly would have included Hare’s proposal in
Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform, and mentions his almost immediately
subsequent treatment of it in “Recent Writers on Reform” (the next essay
in this volume). Actually this account disguises one further step in his
propagandism for Hare’s scheme. By 3 March, 1859, just after the first
publication of Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform, Mill had read Hare’s
Treatise, and must soon have written his review of it. Austin’s Plea.
and Lorimer’s Political Edition: current; Page: [lxxxvii] Progress, for
by 29 March he was able to tell Hare that it would appear in Fraser’s
Magazine, as it did in April.43 But later in 1859, when a second edition
of Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform was called for, he appended to it a
long section from “Recent Writers on Reform” dealing with Hare’s plan.44
When the two essays appeared in the third volume of Dissertations and
Discussions (1867)—the form in which Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform is
usually read—there was, of course, no need to append the section, since
it was included in “Recent Writers on Reform.”45

All of the matters discussed in Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform and
“Recent Writers on Reform” are treated at greater length in Mill’s main
treatise devoted to political theory, Considerations on Representative
Government,46 the next item in this volume, which was written in the
following year, 1860. Mill wrote to Henry Fawcett on 24 December of that
year that he had completed two works, “one of them a considerable
volume” (the other was Utilitarianism, which appeared in serial form in
Fraser’s late in 1861), and made “good progress with a third” (the
Subjection).47 Little is known of the details of composition, though it
would appear from letters to Charles Dupont-White that much of the work
was completed by April of 1860, and it was in the press in early March
of 1861.48 The first edition was soon exhausted, and Mill revised the
work in early summer by, as usual, “des changemens purement verbaux,”
and adding a note to Chapter xiv and several pages in defence of Hare’s
scheme to Chapter vii.49 A third edition Edition: current; Page:
[lxxxviii] being called for three years later, Mill finished the
revision by 6 November, 1864,50 and the edition appeared in February,
1865.

At the end of the Preface, Mill introduced in the 2nd edition a comment
(see 373a) that, apart from the pages added to defend Hare’s scheme
(462r-r465), and a short note (528n), the only changes introduced were
“purely verbal,” (Cf. his comments to correspondents cited above.) In
fact, he made 105 substantive changes (including another added
footnote), of which about one-half involve at least a minor
qualification. There is no prefatory indication in the 3rd edition of
the further eighty-eight substantive variants (including four added
footnotes) there introduced. (There are in addition seventeen variants
in the self-quotations from Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform and “Recent
Writers on Reform,” some of them more important than might be expected.)
Only a few of these may here be mentioned, though many are of more than
passing interest, especially because popular reprints are often based on
the 1st edition. Those mentioned in the Preface to the 2nd edition
should of course be studied (that at 528n contains a further correction
of fact in the 3rd edition), as should those mentioned in letters by
Mill (465n, on Personal Representation, and 534-5b-b, on the democratic
institutions of the New England States),51 and that in the closing
paragraph of Chapter ix, on indirect election (486-7f-f). The
qualifications for senatorial office are interestingly modified, in the
second edition at 517i-i, and (of special note for academics) in the
third at 517k-k. There are quite a few variants reflecting changed
circumstances in other countries—for example, the emancipation of the
serfs in Russia (382h), the revolution in Greece (415n), and the Civil
War in the United States (553a-a to c-c, 557g-g to i-i. A kind of minor
change, noted above in other contexts as having significance in
cumulative effect, which might escape notice, is illustrated at 403c-c,
where in 1865 “a people” was changed to “the people.” And finally,
passing by more important matters that the attentive reader will note,
two oddities may be mentioned: at 473g-g, the change in the 2nd edition
from “the” to “a” somewhat disguises a probable allusion to Swift; and
at 497u-u, the change in the 3rd edition from “euphonious” to
“euphemistic” calls attention to what would appear to be an unusual
lapse on Mill’s part rather than a printer’s error.

Among the People’s Editions of Mill’s works, that of Representative
Government is unique in having some claim to textual authority, in that
the variants, substantive and accidental, suggest that it was prepared
from the text of the final Library Edition in Mill’s lifetime (both were
published in 1865).52 The number of typographical errors in the People’s
Edition, however, Edition: current; Page: [lxxxix] and the problems of
deciding among the accidentals (which are few and trivial), make it
unwise to depart from our policy of using the final Library Editions as
copy-text; the substantive variants between the People’s and Library
Editions are given in Appendix E.

It should be mentioned that more editions of Mill’s works appeared in
1865 than in any other year: in addition to the two editions of
Representative Government, the fifth editions of both the Logic and the
Principles, the People’s Editions of On Liberty and the Principles, the
periodical and first book editions of Auguste Comte and Positivism, and
the first and second editions of the Examination of Sir William
Hamilton’s Philosophy. The sale of all these, and his public reputation,
were enhanced by his unusual and successful candidacy for Westminster in
this same year.

The final item in this volume, “Centralisation,” which appeared in the
Edinburgh Review for April, 1862, explores, through its review of works
by Dupont-White and Odilon Barrot, a theme long on Mill’s mind, one not
examined as thoroughly as might be expected in Representative
Government, which he had presumably just completed before reading
Dupont-White’s Centralisation.53 The article itself is not referred to
in the Autobiography (few of Mill’s late articles are), but the
importance of the theme is developed at length in his homage to
Tocqueville (115-16), which concludes with a reference to his “serious
study” of the problems of centralization. This study included the
reading of Dupont-White’s L’Individu et l’Etat in 1858, when the two
began a fairly extensive correspondence that shows Mill steering his
course between extremes, but certainly closer to his own shore than
Dupont-White’s. Their relations were cemented by the latter’s
translations of On Liberty (1860) and Representative Government (1862),
and Mill was attracted towards giving an account of the Frenchman’s
ideas after reading his Centralisation, a continuation of L’Individu et
l’Etat.54 He therefore wrote, on 1 May, 1861, to Henry Reeve, editor of
the Edinburgh, proposing a review to be completed during the summer or
autumn, and including mention of Odilon Barrot’s book.55 Although Reeve
was himself writing on centralization (in education) for the July, 1861,
number of the Edinburgh, Mill’s suggestion was taken up. Having written
the review after his return from Avignon in June, he reported on 4
December to Dupont-White that he had sent the review to Reeve; although
Mill thought it might be too long, it was accepted, and appeared in
April, 1862.56

This article would be better known had Mill chosen to republish it in
the third volume of Dissertations and Discussions (1867). In fact, he
would seem to have planned to include it, for his library in Somerville
College Edition: current; Page: [xc] includes, among articles cut from
reviews, “Centralisation,” prepared like the others for republication.57
There is no evident reason for his excluding it, especially as Volume
III (which includes essays up to 1866), is slimmer than the first two
volumes.

This essay of 1862, though it is the latest in this volume, does not, of
course, mark the end of Mill’s interest in political and social
questions. But henceforth his published opinions were more closely
attached to particular events, or have their main focus elsewhere,
especially during his parliamentary career from 1865 to 1868.


TEXTUAL PRINCIPLES AND METHODS

as throughout this edition, the copy-text for each item is that of the
final version supervised by Mill.58 There are, it is to be regretted, no
extant manuscripts for any of the essays here included. Details
concerning revisions are given in the headnotes to each item and in the
discussion above.

Method of indicating variants. All the substantive variants are governed
by the principles enunciated below; “substantive” here means all changes
of text except spelling, hyphenation, punctuation, demonstrable
typographical errors, and such printing-house concerns as type size,
etc. There being few cases of changed initial capitalization, and some
of them having at least suggestive significance, these are given as
substantives. All substantive variants are indicated, except the
substitution of “on” for “upon” (twenty-one instances). The variants are
of three kinds: addition of a word or words, substitution of a word or
words, deletion of a word or words. The following illustrative examples
are drawn, except as indicated, from “De Tocqueville on Democracy in
America [II].”

Addition of a word or words: see 157b-b. In the text, the passage “will,
in general, longest hesitate” appears as “willb, in general,b longest
hesitate”; the variant note reads “b-b+67”. Here the plus sign indicates
the edition of this particular text in which the addition appears. The
editions are always indicated by the last two numbers of the year of
publication: here 67 = 1867 (the 2nd edition of Volumes I and II of
Dissertations and Discussions). Information explaining the use of these
abbreviations is given in each headnote, as required. Any added
editorial comment is enclosed in square brackets and italicized.

Placing this example in context, the interpretation is that when first
Edition: current; Page: [xci] published (1840) the reading was “will
longest hesitate”; this reading was retained in 1859 (the 1st edition of
Volumes I and II of Dissertations and Discussions); but in 1867 the
reading became “will, in general, longest hesitate”.

Substitution of a word or words: see 157c-c. In the text the passage “he
has of necessity left much undone, and” appears as “he has cof necessity
left much undone,c and”; the variant note reads “c-c40 left much undone,
as who could possibly avoid?” Here the words following the edition
indicator are those for which “of necessity left much undone” were
substituted; applying the same rules and putting the variant in context,
the interpretation is that when first published (1840) the reading was
“he has left much undone, as who could possibly avoid? and”; in 1859
this was altered to “he has of necessity left much undone, and”; and the
reading of 1859 (as is clear in the text) was retained in 1867.

In this volume there are very few examples of passages that were altered
more than once: an illustrative instance is found in Considerations on
Representative Government at 456k-k. The text reads “kor who could not
succeed in carrying the local candidate they preferred, would have the
power tok fill up”; the variant note reads “k-k611 would] 612 would have
the power to”. Here the different readings, in chronological order, are
separated by a square bracket. The interpretation is that the reading in
the 1st edition (1861), “would fill up”, was altered in the 2nd edition
(also 1861) to “would have the power to fill up”, and in the 3rd edition
(1865, the copytext) to “or who could not succeed in carrying the local
candidate they preferred, would have the power to fill up”.

Deletion of a word or words: see 157e and 23g-g. The first of these is
typical, representing the most convenient way of indicating deletions in
a later edition. In the text at 157e a single superscripte appears
centred between “second” and “is”; the variant note reads “e40
(published only this year)”. Here the words following the edition
indicator are the ones deleted, applying the same rules and putting the
variant in context, the interpretation is that when first published
(1840) the reading was “second (published only this year) is”; in 1859
the parenthesis was deleted, and the reading of 1859 (as is clear in the
text) was retained in 1867.

The second example (23g-g) illustrates the method used in the volume to
cover more conveniently deletions when portions of the copy-text were
later reprinted, as in the case of “Rationale of Representation,” part
of which was republished in the “Appendix” to Dissertations and
Discussions, Volume I. (That is, there is here, exceptionally, a later
version of part of the copy-text, whereas normally the copy-text is the
latest version.) In the text the words “a most powerfully” appear as “a
gmostg powerfully”, the variant note reads “g-g—67.” The minus sign
indicates that in the edition Edition: current; Page: [xcii] signified
the word enclosed was deleted; putting the example in context the
interpretation is that when first published (1835) the reading was (as
is clear in the text) “a most powerfully”; this reading was retained in
1859, but in 1867 it was altered to “a powerfully”.

Dates of footnotes: see 164n. Here the practice is to place immediately
after the footnote indicator, in square brackets, the figures indicating
the edition in which Mill’s footnote first appeared. In the example
cited, “[59]” signifies that the note was added in 1859 (and retained in
1867). If no such indication appears, the note is in all versions.

Punctuation and spelling. In general, changes between versions in
punctuation and spelling are ignored. Those changes that occur as part
of a substantive variant are included in that variant, and the
superscript letters in the text are placed exactly with reference to
punctuation. Changes between italic and roman type are treated as
substantive variants and are therefore shown, except in foreign phrases
and titles of works.

Other textual liberties. Some of the titles have been modified or added,
as explained above; the full titles in their various forms will be found
in the headnotes. The dates added to the titles are those of first
publication. When footnotes to the titles gave bibliographic
information, these have been deleted, and the information given in the
headnotes. In two places a line space has been inserted between
paragraphs where there is a page break in the copy-text; in both cases
the space is justified by other editions and parallel cases.59 On 200,
where Mill added part of another essay, a series of asterisks replaces a
rule; square brackets are deleted; and the explanatory paragraph is
raised to normal type size. (In the same essay, at 176.9, “first part”
is altered to “First Part” to conform to earlier and adjacent usage.)

Typographical errors have been silently corrected in the text; the note
below lists them.60 In the headnotes the quotations from Mill’s
bibliography, Edition: current; Page: [xciii] the manuscript of which is
a scribal copy, are also silently corrected; again, the note below lists
them.61 While the punctuation and spelling of each item are retained,
the style has been made uniform: for example, periods are deleted after
references to monarchs (e.g., “Louis XIV.,”), dashes are deleted when
combined with other punctuation before a quotation or reference, and
italic punctuation after italic passages has been made roman.
Indications of ellipsis have been normalized to three dots plus, when
necessary, terminal punctuation. The positioning of footnote indicators
has been normalized so that they always appear after adjacent
punctuation marks; in some cases references have been moved from the
beginning to the end of quotations for consistency.

Also, in accordance with modern practice, all long quotations have been
reduced in type size and the quotation marks removed. In consequence, it
has occasionally been necessary to add square brackets around Mill’s
words in quotations; there is little opportunity for confusion, as there
are no editorial insertions except page references. Double quotation
marks replace single, and titles of works originally published
separately are given in italics. Mill’s references to sources, and
additional editorial references (in square brackets), have been
normalized. When necessary his references have been silently corrected;
a list of the corrections and alterations is given in the note below.62

Edition: current; Page: [xciv]
Appendices. Two items have been taken out of the normal chronological
order and appended, but otherwise treated uniformly with the main text:
Appendix A, the review of Taylor’s Statesman, is placed here because it
was jointly authored by George Grote and Mill and the precise
contribution of each is not known; Appendix B, the “Appendix” to Volume
I of Dissertations and Discussions, is here relegated because it
combines portions of “Rationale of Representation” and “De Tocqueville
on Democracy in America[I],” both of which are fully reprinted in the
text.

Appendix C consists of an extract from a letter from Benjamin Jowett on
the proposed competitive examinations for the Civil Service that
contains opinions criticized by Mill in his submission on the same
topic, and a footnote editorially appended to Mill’s own submission,
containing Jowett’s reply to Mill’s criticism. These materials are
included because they give context to Mill’s remarks, and because the
footnote appears in the pamphlet version of Mill’s submission.

Appendices D and E, for reasons given above, list, respectively, the
substantive variants between the People’s Editions of On Liberty and
Considerations on Representative Government and the last Library
Editions of those works in Mill’s lifetime.

Appendix F, the Bibliographic Appendix, provides a guide to Mill’s
references and quotations, with notes concerning the separate entries,
and a list of substantive variants between his quotations and their
sources. The items in this volume contain references to over 160
publications (excluding Statutes and Parliamentary Papers, and
unidentified anonymous quotations, but including classical tags, and
references that occur in quotations from others). Mill quotes from over
one-half of these, including the sixteen works he reviews. He quotes
from nine of his own writings, and refers to Edition: current; Page:
[xcv] six more. (There are also quotations from three of his father’s
writings, and references to three others.) The most extensive quotation
is, as one would expect, from reviewed works; a large number of the
shorter quotations (some of which are indirect) are undoubtedly taken
from memory, with no explicit references being given, and the
identification of some of these is inescapably inferential. It will be
noted that Mill habitually translates from the French. Except for the
standard classical authors, few important references are made to
standard works in the history of political thought. In this context, one
may refer (without predicting the effect of the reference) to Mill’s
praise of Lewis (5n below) for having “spared himself the ostentatious
candour of mentioning the authors to whom he was indebted, they being
mostly writers of established reputation” whose “truths . . . are the
common property of mankind”; the contrary practice implies “either that
the author cares, and expects the reader to care, more about the
ownership of an idea than about its value; or else that he designs to
pass himself off as the first promulgator of every thought which he does
not expressly assign to the true discoverer.” Whatever view one may take
of Mill’s attitude towards real property, he evidently was not, in 1832
an advocate of pedant proprietorship.

Because Appendix F serves as an index to persons, writings, and
statutes, references to them do not appear in the Index proper, which
has been prepared by Dr. Bruce Kinzer.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

to the members of the Editorial Committee, and especially Alexander
Brady and J. B. Conacher, to the editorial and printing staff of the
University of Toronto Press, and especially the copy-editor. Rosemary
Shipton, and to my research assistant, Judith Le Goff. my most sincere
appreciation and thanks. I am deeply indebted to the staffs of various
libraries, including the British Library, the University of Toronto
Library, the Victoria University Library, the University of London
Library, the British Library of Political and Economic Science, the
London Library, and (a special thanks for prompt and ever-courteous aid)
the library of Somerville College, Oxford. Among others who have helped
in various ways, and to whom this mention is insufficient reward, are C.
J. Allen, John Anton, Joan Bigwood, Frank Collins, Roland Hall, William
J. Hyde, Patricia Kennedy, L. M. Kenny, Michael Laine, Jane Millgate,
Ann Christine, John, and William Robson, Flora Roy, James P. Scanlan,
Francis Sparshott, James Steintrager, and Kenneth Thompson. And, last
and foremost, to my wife who, society and politics notwithstanding, has
aided me cheerfully and expertly, my reiterated but still heartfelt
gratitude.

Edition: current; Page: [1]


Essays on Politics and Society


USE AND ABUSE OF POLITICAL TERMS
 1832

Edition: current; Page: [2]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Tait’s Edinburgh Magazine, I (May, 1832), 164-72. Unsigned. Not
republished. The title is footnoted: “Use and Abuse of Political Terms.
By George Cornwall [sic] Lewis, Esq. Student of Christ Church, Oxford.
London: Fellowes, 1832.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A review
of Geo. Cornewall Lewis’s Remarks on the Use and Abuse of Political
Terms, in the second number of Tait’s Edinburgh Magazine (May, 1832.)”
(MacMinn, 21.) The copy in Somerville College, on which JSM has written
“From Tait’s Magazine for May 1832”, has no corrections or emendations.
For JSM’s contemporary attitude to the essay, see the Textual
Introduction, lxx-lxxii above.

JSM quotes part of this review (see 9-10 below) in his Logic, producing
variant readings, which are footnoted. In the variant notes the editions
of the Logic are indicated by the last two figures of their dates of
publication: e.g., “51—72” means that the reading given is that of the
3rd (1851) to 8th (1872) editions; “MS—72” means that the reading is
that from the manuscript through the 8th edition.

Edition: current; Page: [3]


Use and Abuse of Political Terms

mr. lewis is known in society as the son of the Right Hon. T. Frankland
Lewis, and in literature, as the translator, jointly with Mr. Henry
Tufnell, of two erudite and interesting works on classical antiquity,
Muller’s Dorians, and Bockh’s Public Economy of Athens.[*] Mr. Lewis is
also the author of a little work on logic;[†] to which subject,
stimulated like many others of the Oxford youth, by the precepts and
example of Dr. Whately, he has devoted more than common attention, and
was so far peculiarly qualified for writing such a work as the volume
before us professes to be. This alone should entitle him to no slight
praise; for such is the present state of the human mind, in some
important departments, that it is often highly meritorious to have
written a book, in itself of no extraordinary merit, if the work afford
proof that any one of the requisites for writing a good book on the same
subject is possessed in an eminent degree.

Certain it is, that there scarcely ever was a period when logic was so
little studied, systematically, and in a scientific manner, as of late
years; while, perhaps, no generation ever had less to plead in
extenuation of neglecting it. For if, in order to reason well, it were
only necessary to be destitute of every spark of fancy and poetic
imagination, the world of letters and thought might boast, just now, of
containing few besides good reasoners; people to whom, one would
imagine, that logic must be all in all, if we did not, to our
astonishment, find that they despise it. But the most prosaic
matter-of-fact person in the world must not flatter himself that he is
able to reason because he is fit for nothing else. Reasoning, like all
other mental excellencies, comes by appropriate culture: not by
exterminating the opposite good quality, the other half of a perfect
character. Perhaps the mere reasoners, with whom the world abounds,
would be considerably less numerous, if men really took the pains to
learn to reason. It is a sign of a weak judgment, as of a weak virtue,
to take to flight at the approach of every thing which Edition: current;
Page: [4] can, by any remote possibility, lead it astray. Men who, for
want of cultivation, have the intellects of dwarfs, are of course the
slaves of their imagination, if they have any, as they are the slaves of
their sensations, if they have not; and it is partly, perhaps, because
the systematic culture of the thinking faculty is in little repute, that
imagination also is in such bad odour; there being no solidity and
vigour of intellect to resist it where it tends to mislead. The
sublimest of English poets composed an elementary book of logic for the
schools;[*] but our puny rhymsters think logic, forsooth, too dry for
them;* and our logicians, from that and other causes, very commonly say
with M. Casimir Perier, A quoi un poëte est-il bon?

In undertaking to treat of the use and abuse of the leading terms of
political philosophy, Mr. Lewis has set before himself a task to which
no one but a logician could be competent, and one of the most important
to which logic could be applied. If, however, we were disposed for
minute criticism, we might find some scope for it in the very
title-page. We might ask, what is meant by an abuse of terms; and
whether a man is not at liberty to employ terms in any way which enables
him to deliver himself of his own ideas the most intelligibly; to bring
home to the minds of others, in the greatest completeness, the
impression which exists in his own? This question, though it has a
considerable bearing upon many parts of Mr. Lewis’s book, throws,
however, no doubt upon the importance of the object he aims at. His end
is, to prevent things essentially different, from being confounded,
because they happen to be called by the same name. It is past doubt that
this, like all other modes of false and slovenly thinking, might be
copiously exemplified from the field of politics; and Mr. Lewis has not
been unhappy in his choice of examples. The instances, in which the
confusion of language is the consequence, and not the cause, of the
erroneous train of thought (which we believe to be generally the more
common case,) are equally worthy of Mr. Lewis’s attention, and will, no
doubt, in time receive an equal share of it.

Some notion of the extent of ground over which our author travels may be
gathered from his table of contents; which, with that view, we
transcribe:

1. Government. 2. Constitution—Constitutional. 3.
Right—Duty—Wrong—Rightful—Wrongful—Justice. 4. Law—Lawful—Unlawful. 5.
Sovereign—Sovereignty—Division of Forms of Government. 6.
Monarchy—Royalty—King. 7. Commonwealth—Republic—Republican. 8.
Aristocracy—Oligarchy—Nobility. 9. Democracy. 10. Mixed
Government—Balance of Powers Edition: current; Page: [5] 11.
People—Community. 12. Representation—Representative—Representative
Government. 13. Rich—Middle Class—Poor. 14.
Nature—Natural—Unnatural—State of Nature. 15. Liberty—Freedom—Free. 16.
Free Government—Arbitrary Government—Tyranny—Despotism—Anarchy. 17.
Power—Authority—Force. 18. Public—Private—Political—Civil—Municipal. 19.
Property—Possession—Estate—Estates of Parliament. 20. Community of
Goods.

To explain thoroughly the various senses of any one of these terms,
would require, possibly, as much space, as Mr. Lewis has devoted to them
all. His observations, however, are those of an instructed and
intelligent mind. They contain, perhaps, not much that is absolutely
new; except that ideas, which the mind has made completely its own,
always come out in a form more or less different from that in which they
went in, and are, in that sense, always original. Moreover, any one who
can look straight into a thing itself, and not merely at its image
mirrored in another man’s mind, can also look at things, upon occasion,
when there is no other man to point them out.*

Yet, highly as we think of this work, and still more highly of the
author’s capabilities, we will not pretend that he has realized all our
conceptions of what such a work ought to be. We do not think he is fully
conscious of what his subject requires of him. The most that he ever
seems to accomplish, is to make out that something is wrong, but not how
that which is wrong may be made right. He may say, that this is all he
aimed at; and so, indeed, it is. But it may always be questioned,
whether one has indeed cut down to the Edition: current; Page: [6] very
root of an error, who leaves no truth planted in its stead. Mr. Lewis,
at least, continually leaves the mind under the unsatisfactory
impression, that the matter has not been probed to the bottom, and that
underneath almost every thing which he sees, there lies something deeper
which he does not see. If in this we should be deemed hypercritical, we
would say in our defence, that we should never think of ranging Mr.
Lewis in the class of those, from whom we take thankfully and without
asking questions, any trifling matter, which is all they have to bestow.
The author of such a work as the present, is entitled to be tried by the
same standard as the highest order of intellect; to be compared not with
the small productions of small minds, but with ideal perfection.

Mankind have many ideas, and but few words. This truth should never be
absent from the mind of one who takes upon him to decide if another
man’s language is philosophical or the reverse. Two consequences follow
from it; one, that a certain laxity in the use of language must be borne
with, if a writer makes himself understood; the other, that, to
understand a writer who is obliged to use the same words as a vehicle
for different ideas, requires a vigorous effort of co-operation on the
part of the reader. These unavoidable ambiguities render it easier, we
admit, for confusion of ideas to pass undetected: but they also render
it more difficult for any man’s ideas to be so expressed that they shall
not appear confused; particularly when viewed with that habitual
contempt with which men of clear ideas generally regard those, any of
whose ideas are not clear, and with that disposition which contempt,
like every other passion, commonly carries with it, to presume the
existence of its object. It should be recollected, too, that many a man
has a mind teeming with important thoughts, who is quite incapable of
putting them into words which shall not be liable to any metaphysical
objection; that when this is the case, the logical incoherence or
incongruity of the expression, is commonly the very first thing which
strikes the mind, and that which there is least merit in perceiving. The
man of superior intellect, in that case, is not he who can only see that
the proposition precisely as stated, is not true; but he who, not
overlooking the incorrectness at the surface, does, nevertheless,
discern that there is truth at the bottom. The logical defect, on the
other hand, is the only thing which strikes the eye of the mere
logician. The proper office, we should have conceived, of a clear
thinker, would be to make other men’s thoughts clear for them, if they
cannot do it for themselves, and to give words to the man of genius,
fitted to express his ideas with philosophical accuracy. Socrates, in
the beautiful dialogue called the Phædrus, describes his own vocation as
that of a mental midwife:[*] not so Mr. A. or B., who, perhaps, owes the
advantage of clear Edition: current; Page: [7] ideas to the fact of his
having no ideas which it is at all difficult to make clear. The use of
logic, it would seem, to such a person, is not to help others, but to
privilege himself against being required to listen to them. He will not
think it worth his while to examine what a man has to say, unless it is
put to him in such a manner that it shall cost him no trouble at all to
make it out. If you come to him needing help, you may learn from him
that you are a fool; but you certainly will not be made wise.

It would be grossly unjust to Mr. Lewis to accuse him of any thing
approaching to this; but we could have wished that his work could have
been more decidedly cited as an example of the opposite quality. We
desiderate in it somewhat more of what becomes all men, but, most of
all, a young man, to whom the struggles of life are only in their
commencement, and whose spirit cannot yet have been wounded, or his
temper embittered by hostile collision with the world, but which, in
young men more especially, is apt to be wanting—a slowness to condemn. A
man must now learn, by experience, what once came almost by nature to
those who had any faculty of seeing; to look upon all things with a
benevolent, but upon great men and their works with a reverential
spirit, rather to seek in them for what he may learn from them, than for
opportunities of shewing what they might have learned from him; to give
such men the benefit of every possibility of their having spoken with a
rational meaning; not easily or hastily to persuade himself that men
like Plato, and Locke, and Rousseau, and Bentham, gave themselves a
world of trouble in running after something which they thought was a
reality, but which he Mr. A. B. can clearly see to be an unsubstantial
phantom; to exhaust every other hypothesis, before supposing himself
wiser than they; and even then to examine, with good will and without
prejudice, if their error do not contain some germ of truth; and if any
conclusion, such as a philosopher can adopt, may even yet be built upon
the foundation on which they, it may be, have reared nothing but an
edifice of sand.

Such men are not refuted because they are convicted of using words
occasionally with no very definite meaning, or even of founding an
argument upon an ambiguity. The substance of correct reasoning may still
be there, although there be a deficiency in the forms. A vague term,
which they may never have given themselves the trouble to define, may
yet, on each particular occasion, have excited in their minds precisely
the ideas it should excite. The leading word in an argument may be
ambiguous; but between its two meanings there is often a secret link of
connexion, unobserved by the critic but felt by the author, though
perhaps he may not have given himself a strictly logical account of it;
and the conclusion may turn not upon what is different in the two
meanings, but upon what they have in common, or at least analogous.

Until logicians know these things, and act as if they knew them, they
must not expect that a logician and a captious man will cease to be, in
common Edition: current; Page: [8] apprehension, nearly synonymous. How,
in fact, can it be otherwise in the mind of a person, who knows not very
clearly what logic is, but who finds that he can in no way give
utterance to his conviction without infringing logical rules, while he
is conscious all the time that the real grounds of the conviction have
not been touched in the slightest degree?

It is only in a very qualified sense that these admonitions can be
applied to Mr. Lewis; but there are so few persons of our time to whom
they do not apply more or less, (and perhaps there have been but few at
any time,) that we are not surprised to find them even in his case far
from superfluous. It remains for us to establish this by particular
instances.

Mr. Lewis, under the word right, gives a definition of legal rights, and
then lays it down that all rights are the creatures of law, that is, of
the will of the sovereign; that the sovereign himself has no rights, nor
can any one have rights as against the sovereign; because, being
sovereign, he is by that supposition exempt from legal obligation, or
legal responsibility. So far, so good Mr. Lewis then says, that to call
any thing a right which cannot be enforced by law, is an abuse of
language. We answer,—Not until mankind have consented to be bound by Mr.
Lewis’s definition. For example, when Dr. Johnson says[*] that a man has
not a moral right to think as he pleases, “because he ought to inform
himself, and think justly,” Mr. Lewis says [p. 21] he must mean legal
right; and adds other observations, proving that he has not even caught
a glimpse of Johnson’s drift. Again, according to him, whoever asserts
that no man can have a right to do that which is wrong, founds an
argument upon a mere ambiguity, confounding a right with the adjective
right: and this ambiguity is “mischievous, because it serves as an
inducement to error, and confounds things as well as words.” [P. xv.]

Now, we contend that Mr. Lewis is here censuring what he does not
thoroughly understand, and that the use of the word right, in both these
cases, is as good logic and as good English as his own. Right is the
correlative of duty, or obligation; and (with some limitations) is
co-extensive with those terms. Whatever any man is under an obligation
to give you, or to do for you, to that you have a right. There are legal
obligations, and there are consequently legal rights. There are also
moral obligations; and no one, that we know of considers this phrase an
abuse of language, or proposes that it should be dispensed with. It
seems, therefore, but an adherence to the established usage of our
language, to speak of moral rights; which stand in the same relation to
moral obligations as legal rights do to legal obligations. All that is
necessary is to settle distinctly with ourselves, and make it
intelligible to those whom we are addressing, which kind of rights it is
that we mean; if we fail in which, we become justly liable to Mr.
Lewis’s censure. It has not Edition: current; Page: [9] totally escaped
Mr. Lewis that there may be some meaning in the phrase, moral rights;
but he has, by no means, correctly hit that meaning. He expounds it
thus, “claims recommended by views of justice or public policy;” the
sort of claim a man may be said to have to anything which you think it
desirable that he should possess. [P. 8.] No such thing. No man in his
sound senses considers himself to be wronged every time he does not get
what he desires; every man distinguishes between what he thinks another
man morally bound to do, and what he merely would like to see him do;
between what is morally criminal, a fit subject for complaint or
reproach, and what excites only regrets, and a wish that the act had
been abstained from. No system of moral philosophy or metaphysics that
we ever heard of, denies this distinction; though several have
undertaken to account for it, and to place it upon the right footing.

If you may say that it is the moral duty of subjects to obey their
government, you may also express this by saying that government has a
moral right to their obedience. If you may say that it is the moral duty
of sovereigns to govern well, or else to abdicate, you may say that
subjects have a right to be well governed. If you may say, that it is
morally culpable in a government to attempt to retain its authority,
contrary to the inclinations of its subjects; you may say, that the
people have a right to change their government. All this, without any
logical inaccuracy, or “abuse of language.” We are not defending this
phraseology as the best that can be employed; the language of right and
the language of duty, are logically equivalent, and the latter has, in
many respects, the advantage. We are only contending, that, whoever uses
the word right shall not be adjudged guilty of nonsense, until it has
been tried whether this mode of interpreting his meaning will make it
sense. And this we complain that Mr. Lewis has not done.

To explain what we meant by saying that almost everything which Mr.
Lewis sees has something lying under it which he does not see, we have
now to shew, that, in catching at an imaginary ambiguity near the
surface, he has missed the deeper and less obvious ambiguities by which
men are really misled. Two of these we shall briefly set forth.

aSpeaking morally, you are said to have a right to do a thing, if all
persons are morally bound not to hinder you from doing it. But, in
another sense, to have a right to do a thing, is the opposite of having
no right to do it,—bviz.b of being under a moral obligation to forbear
cfromc doing it. In this sense, to say that you have a right to do a
thing, means that you may do it without any breach of duty on your part,
that other persons not only ought not to hinder you, but have no cause
to think dthed worse of you for doing it. This is a Edition: current;
Page: [10] perfectly distinct proposition from the preceding. The
erighte which you have by virtue of a duty incumbent upon other persons,
is obviously quite a different thing from a right consisting in the
absence of any duty incumbent upon yourself. Yet the two things are
perpetually confounded. Thus a man will say he has a right to publish
his opinions; which may be true in this sense, that it would be a breach
of duty in any other person to interfere and prevent the
publication:—but he assumes thereupon, that in publishing his opinions,
he himself violates no duty; which may either be true or false,
depending, as it does, upon his having taken due pains to satisfy
himself, first, that the opinions are true, and next, that their
publication in this manner, and at this particular juncture, will
probably be beneficial to the interests of truth, on the whole. fIn this
sense of the word, a man has no right to do that which is wrong, though
it may often happen that nobody has a right to prevent him from doing
it.f

The second ambiguity is that of confounding a right, of any kind, with a
right to enforce that right by resisting or punishing a violation of it.
gMeng will say, for example, that they have a right to hah good
government; which is undeniably true, it being the moral duty of their
governors to govern them well. But in granting this, you are supposed to
have admitted their right or liberty to turn out their governors, and
perhaps to punish them, for having failed in the performance of this
duty; which, far from being the same thing, is by no means universally
true, but depends upon an immense number of varying circumstances,a and
is, perhaps, altogether the knottiest question in practical ethics. This
example involves both the ambiguities which we have mentioned.

We have dwelt longer on this one topic than the reader perhaps will
approve. We shall pass more slightly over the remainder.

Our author treats with unqualified contempt all that has been written by
Locke and others, concerning a state of nature and the social compact.
[Pp. 185ff.] In this we cannot altogether agree with him. The state of
society contemplated by Rousseau, in which mankind lived together
without government, may never have existed, and it is of no consequence
whether it did so or not. The question is not whether it ever existed,
but whether there is any advantage in supposing it hypothetically; as we
assume in argument all kinds of cases which never occur, in order to
illustrate those which do. All discussions respecting a state of nature
are inquiries what morality would be if there were no law. This is the
real scope of Locke’s Essay on Government,[*] rightly understood:
whatever is objectionable in the details did not Edition: current; Page:
[11] arise from the nature of the inquiry, but from a certain wavering
and obscurity in his notion of the grounds of morality itself. Nor is
this mode of viewing the subject, we conceive, without its advantages,
in an enlarged view, either of morality or law. Not to mention that, as
is observed by Locke himself, all independent governments, in relation
to one another, are actually in a state of nature, subject to moral
duties but obeying no common superior;[*] so that the speculations which
Mr. Lewis despises, tend, in international morality at least, to a
direct practical application.

Even the social compact, (though a pure fiction, upon which no valid
argument can consequently be founded,) and the doctrine connected with
it, of the inalienable and imprescriptible rights of man, had this good
in them, that they were suggested by a sense, that the power of the
sovereign, although, of course, incapable of any legal limitation, has a
moral limit, since a government ought not to take from any of its
subjects more than it gives. Whatever obligation any man would lie under
in a state of nature, not to inflict evil upon another for the sake of
good to himself, that same obligation lies upon society towards every
one of its members. If he injure or molest any of his fellow-citizens,
the consequences of whatever they may be obliged to do in self-defence,
must fall upon himself; but otherwise, the government fails of its duty,
if on any plea of doing good to the community in the aggregate, it
reduces him to such a state, that he is on the whole a loser by living
in a state of government, and would have been better off if it did not
exist. This is the truth which was dimly shadowed forth, in howsoever
rude and unskilful a manner, in the theories of the social compact and
of the rights of man. It was felt, that a man’s voluntary consent to
live under a government, was the surest proof he could give of his
feeling it to be beneficial to him: and so great was the importance
attached to this sort of assurance, that where an express consent was
out of the question, some circumstance was fixed upon, from which, by
stretching a few points, a consent might be presumed. But the test is
real, where, as in imperfectly settled countries, the forest is open to
the man who is not contented with his lot.

Notwithstanding the length to which our remarks have extended, we cannot
overlook one or two passages, less remarkable for their importance, than
as proofs of the haste with which Mr. Lewis must have examined the
authors and even the passages he has criticised.

Thus, where Mr. Bentham recommends natural procedure in the
administration of justice, in opposition to technical, Mr. Lewis
observes, that as it is impossible to suppose that any mode of judicial
procedure should be left to the discretion of the judge guided by no
rules, the word natural, in this case, “seems to be a vague term of
praise, signifying that system which, to the writer, seems most
expedient.” [Pp. 182-3.] It shews but little knowledge Edition: current;
Page: [12] of Mr. Bentham’s habits of mind, to account in this way, of
all others, for any phraseology he may think proper to adopt. The fact
is, as has been explained a hundred times by Mr. Bentham himself,—that
by natural procedure, he means what he also calls domestic procedure;
viz. the simple and direct mode of getting at the truth which suggests
itself naturally,—that is, readily and invariably, to all men who are
inquiring in good earnest into any matter which, happening to concern
themselves, they are really desirous to ascertain. That the technical
methods of our own, and all other systems of law, are bad in proportion
as they deviate from this, is what Mr. Bentham affirms, and, we will
add, proves.

Again, when Mr. Mill speaks of the corruptive operation[*] of what are
called the advantages of fortune, Mr. Lewis comments [pp. 184n-185n]
upon the strangeness of this sentiment from the writer of a treatise on
Political Economy;[†] that is, on the production and accumulation of
wealth; and hints, that the work in question must have been composed
with an object similar to that of a treatise on poisons. Did it never
occur to Mr. Lewis, that Mr. Mill’s meaning might be, not that a people
are corrupted by the amount of the wealth which they possess in the
aggregate, but that the inequalities in the distribution of it have a
tendency to corrupt those who obtain the large masses, especially when
these come to them by descent, and not by merit, or any kind of exertion
employed in earning them?

To add one instance more. Mr. Lewis falls foul of the often quoted
sentence of Tacitus, “that the most degenerate states have the greatest
number of laws; in corruptissimâ republicâ plurimæ leges;[‡] a position
not only not true, but the very reverse of the truth, as the effect of
the progress of civilization is to multiply enactments, in order to suit
the extended relations, and the more refined and diversified forms of
property, introduced by the improvement of society.” [P. 205.] Mr. Lewis
is a scholar, and understands the words of Tacitus, but, in this case,
it is clear, he has not understood the ideas. He has committed what he
himself would call an ignoratio elenchi. By a corrupt society. Tacitus
(we will take upon ourselves to assert) did not mean a rude society. The
author was speaking of the decline of a nation’s morality, and the
critic talks to you of the improvement of its industry. Tacitus meant,
that, in the most immoral society, there is the most frequent occasion
for the interposition of the legislator; and we venture to agree with
him, thinking it very clear, that the less you are able to rely upon
conscience and opinion, the Edition: current; Page: [13] more you are
obliged to do by means of the law—a truth which is not only not the
opposite of Mr. Lewis’s position, but stands in no logical relation to
it at all, more than to the binomial theorem.

These are the blemishes of Mr. Lewis’s work. Yet they do not induce us
to qualify our high opinion, both of the book and of its author. It is
an able, and a useful publication; only, it is not a sufficient
dissertation on the use and abuse of the leading political terms.

We have often thought, that a really philosophical Treatise on the
Ambiguities of the Moral Sciences would be one of the most valuable
scientific contributions which a man of first-rate intellectual ability
could confer upon his age, and upon posterity. But it would not be so
much a book of criticism as of inquiry. Its main end would be, not to
set people right in their use of words, which you never can be qualified
to do, so long as their thoughts, on the subject treated of, are in any
way different from yours; but to get at their thoughts through their
words, and to see what sort of a view of truth can be got, by looking at
it in their way. It would then be seen, how multifarious are the
properties and distinctions to be marked, and how few the words to mark
them with, so that one word is sometimes all we have to denote a dozen
different ideas, and that men go wrong less often than Mr. Lewis
supposes, from using a word in many senses, but more frequently from
using it only in one, the distinctions which it serves to mark in its
other acceptations not being adverted to at all. Such a book would
enable all kinds of thinkers, who are now at daggers-drawn, because they
are speaking different dialects and know it not, to understand one
another, and to perceive that, with the proper explanations, their
doctrines are reconcilable: and would unite all the exclusive and
one-sided systems, so long the bane of true philosophy, by placing
before each man a more comprehensive view, in which the whole of what is
affirmative in his own view would be included.

This is the larger and nobler design which Mr. Lewis should set before
himself, and which, we believe, his abilities to be equal to, did he but
feel that this is the only task worthy of them. He might thus contribute
a large part to what is probably destined to be the great philosophical
achievement of the era, of which many signs already announce the
commencement; viz. to unite all half-truths, which have been fighting
against one another ever since the creation, and blend them in one
harmonious whole.

Edition: current; Page: [14] Edition: current; Page: [15]


RATIONALE OF REPRESENTATION
 1835

Edition: current; Page: [16]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London Review, I (July, 1835), 341-71 (equivalent to Westminster Review,
XXX); headed: “Art IV. The Rationale of Political Representation. By the
Author of ‘Essays on the Formation of Opinions,’ &c. &c. [Samuel
Bailey.] London, 1835. Hunter, 8vo., pp. 436.” Signed “A”; republished
in part as first section of “Appendix,” Dissertations and Discussions,
I, 467-70. Running title: “Rationale of Representation.” Identified in
JSM’s bibliography as “A review of Bailey’s ‘Rationale of Political
Representation’ in the second number of the London Review (July 1835.)”
(MacMinn, 44.) The copy of this article in the Somerville College
Library has no corrections or emendations. Also in Somerville is a sewn,
uncut offprint, without title, numbered 1-31, and signed “A”. (In the
offprint, parts of which are reset, there are no corrections; some
accidental variants appear [these are not accepted in the present text],
the typographical error at 25.38 is retained, and two more are
introduced.) The review is not mentioned in the Autobiography. For
comment on the circumstances of its publication, see the Textual
Introduction, lxxii-lxxiii above.

In selecting a portion of this review for republication in “Appendix,”
D&D, I, JSM made a few revisions (see 22-4 below). In the variant notes,
“59” indicates D&D. 1st ed., 1859, “67” indicates ibid., 2nd ed., 1867.
JSM also quotes from his “Remarks on Bentham’s Philosophy” (see 42-3
below); the changes are shown as variants, in which “33” indicates
“Remarks on Bentham’s Philosophy.”

Edition: current; Page: [17]


Rationale of Representation

this is the work of a writer who, in the difficult art of making
philosophy popular, has excelled most of his contemporaries; and his
present is not inferior to the best of his former productions.

The theoretical grounds of Representative Government, and the solutions
of the more momentous of its practical problems, are laid down by our
author, in the spirit which is now nearly universal among the more
advanced thinkers on the subject, but with a felicity of adaptation to
the wants of the most numerous class of readers, which is peculiarly his
own. In addition to this, several popular fallacies, of most extensive
prevalence, and infecting the very elements of political speculation,
are refuted, conclusively and forcibly, and with as much depth of
philosophy as the purpose required. The thoughts succeed one another in
the most lucid order. The style is perspicuity itself. To a practised
student in abstract speculation, it will appear diffuse; but this, in a
book intended for popularity, is far from being a defect. To common
readers a condensed style is always cramped and obscure: they want a
manner of writing which shall detain them long enough upon each thought
to give it time to sink into their minds. Our author is not, indeed,
entitled to the transcendant praise due to those who, like Hobbes or
Bacon, employ at pleasure either the power of condensation or that of
enlargement; dwelling on the idea until it has made its way into the
understanding, and then clenching it by one of those striking images, or
of those pregnant and apophthegmatic expressions, which sum up whole
paragraphs in a line, and engrave the meaning as with a burning steel
upon the imagination. But if our author’s style does not come up to this
exalted standard, it is easy, flowing, always unaffected, and has the
greatest of merits, that to which all other excellencies of manner are
merely subsidiary—that of perfectly expressing whatever he has occasion
to express by it.

The work consists of an Introduction, and six Chapters: “On the proper
Object and Province of Government;” “On the Grounds of Preference for a
Representative Government;” “On the Representative Body;” “On the
Electoral Body;” “On Elections;” and “On the Introduction of Changes in
Political Institutions;” with two supplementary essays “On Political
Equality,” and “On Rights.”

Edition: current; Page: [18]
This programme gives a correct indication of the scope and purpose of
the book. It is rightly termed “The Rationale of Political
Representation,” not “The Rationale of Government.” It attempts an
outline of a part only of the philosophy of government, not the whole.
The philosophy of government, a most extensive and complicated science,
would comprise a complete view of the influences of political
institutions; not only their direct, but what are in general so little
attended to, their indirect and remote influences: how they affect the
national character, and all the social relations of a people; and
reciprocally, how the state of society, and of the human mind, aids,
counteracts, or modifies the effects of a form of government, and
promotes or impairs its stability. Such is not the design of this work;
and, considered in this comprehensive sense, the science itself is in
its infancy.* But the advantages of a representative government, and the
principles on which it must be constructed in order to realise those
advantages, form a branch of the subject, the theory of which, so far as
one branch can be considered separately from the rest, may be regarded
as nearly perfect; and to the exposition of this, the work before us is
dedicated.

It must be admitted also, that this one branch of the inquiry runs
parallel, for a considerable distance, to the main trunk. The reasons
for having a representative government, and the reasons for having a
government at all, are, to a very considerable extent, identical. The
ends or uses of government are indeed multifarious, since we may include
among them all benefits, of whatever kind, to the existence of which
government is indispensable; but the first and most fundamental of all,
the only one the importance of which literally amounts to necessity, is
to enable mankind to live in society without oppressing and injuring one
another. And the need of a representative government rests upon
precisely the same basis. As mankind, in a state of society, have need
of government, because, without it, every strong man would oppress his
weaker neighbour; so mankind, in a state of government, have need
Edition: current; Page: [19] of popular representation, because, without
it, those who wielded the powers of government would oppress the rest.

Of this fundamental truth an acute sense is manifested by our author. He
rests the necessity of a popular government upon one primary axiom:
“That men will, in the majority of cases, prefer their own interest to
that of others, when the two are placed in competition.” (P. 68.)
Whoever denies this, denies the principle on which, it is most certain,
he himself habitually acts, when the interest at stake happens to be his
own. It is the principle which all persons, when at liberty to follow
their inclinations, uniformly observe in the guardianship of their own
property. They do not appoint an agent, with liberty to do as he
pleases, and without reserving the power of instantaneous dismissal. If
they did, they would expect that the obligations of his trust would be
disregarded, when in competition either with the interest of his pocket
or with that of his ease.

“From this principle,” says our author, “that men will prefer their own
interest to that of others, when the two are placed in competition, it
follows, that the interest of the community at large will be uniformly
consulted only when they have the regulation of their own affairs.” [P.
69.]

But since government cannot be performed by the community en masse;
since “it is implied in the very notion of government, that a few are
invested with authority over the rest; since, from the nature of the
case, the legislative power must be lodged in the hands of a few; and as
the few possessing it will be tempted in a thousand ways to sacrifice
the public good to their own private interest;” [pp. 69, 70-1] here is
but one resource:

It becomes essentially requisite to place them in such a position that
their own interest, and the public good, shall be identified. The simple
expedient which meets this is to make the office of legislator dependent
on the will of the people. If his power were irresponsible, if it were
subject to no direct control, if the improper exercise of it were not
followed by evil consequences to the possessor, it would be inevitably
abused; the public good would be neglected, and his own habitually
preferred; but by the simple expedient of rendering the continuance of
his power dependent on his constituents, his interest is forced into
coincidence with theirs. Any sinister advantage which he might derive
from the power intrusted to him would cease with the loss of the office,
and he would have no inducement to pursue an advantage of that kind, if
by so doing he unavoidably subjected himself to dismissal. Such is the
general theory of political representation. An individual, under the
title of a representative, is delegated by the people to do that which
they cannot do in their own persons, and he is determined in his acts to
consult the public good, by the power which they retain of dismissing
him from the office.

(P. 71.)

One might have imagined, that if any propositions on public affairs
deserved the character of maxims of common sense, these did. Views of
human affairs more practical and business-like, more in accordance with
the received Edition: current; Page: [20] rules of prudence in private
life, it would be difficult to find. These doctrines, nevertheless, or
at least the possibility of drawing any conclusions from them, have met
with questioners. That human beings will commonly prefer their own
interests to those of other people, and that the way to secure fidelity
to a trust is to make the trustee’s interest coincide with his duty,
have been classed among propositions which are either not true, or, if
true at all, only in a sense in which they are insignificant and
unmeaning. Nor has the assertion been made of these doctrines alone, but
of all propositions relating to the motives of human actions. “When we
pass,” it has been said, “beyond maxims which it is impossible to deny
without a contradiction in terms, and which therefore do not enable us
to advance a single step in practical knowledge, it is not possible to
lay down a single general rule respecting the motives which influence
human actions.”[*] Such was the doctrine maintained in a memorable
article in the Edinburgh Review, by a writer, all whose ingenuity and
brilliancy would not have made his subsequent fortunes what they have
been, but for the grateful acceptance which this doctrine found in
influential quarters.

Our author has no great difficulty in disposing of this theory:

Nothing [says he] can be more extraordinary than an assertion of this
kind, in an age when, at all events, the nature of moral inquiries is
better understood than formerly, however insignificant may have been our
progress in the inquiries themselves. It is extraordinary, too, as
having appeared in a work which is in the habit of favouring its readers
with articles of distinguished ability on political economy, a science
founded on “general rules respecting the motives which influence human
actions,” and which is, further, in the habit of drawing out long
deductions from such general rules. Whoever turns over its pages may
find inferences constantly made from propositions like the following:
“commercial countries will resort to the cheapest market;” “high duties
on imported articles inevitably cause smuggling;” “unusually large
profits in any trade attract capital to it;” “a rise in the price of
corn forces capital on inferior soils.”

It would almost seem as if the reviewer was not aware that all these are
general rules respecting the actions of men. To take the last
proposition: we might conclude from his own doctrine, that he regarded
the high price of corn as a physical agent propelling a material
substance, called capital, upon a sterile field; and had forgotten that
the proposition is an elliptical expression, under which is couched a
law respecting human motives, and which virtually asserts, that when men
become willing to give more money for corn, other men will be willing to
grow it on land before uncultivated.

Political economy abounds with such laws; the common business of life
abounds with them; every trade, every profession, legislation itself,
abounds with them. Is not the whole system of penal legislation founded
on the general rule, that if a punishment is denounced against any given
act, there will be fewer instances of the commission of that act than if
no penalty were annexed to it? Can Edition: current; Page: [21] there be
a proposition which comes more decidedly under the designation of a
general rule respecting the motives which influence human actions? Can
there be a more certain law in physics, and can there be one more
fertile in practical consequences? The very term, efficacy of
punishment, is only an abridged expression of this law of human nature;
it implies a general rule respecting the motives which influence human
actions, and a rule on which all mankind unhesitatingly and habitually
proceed, both in national legislation and private management.

(Pp. 16-18.)

He then shows, by copious examples, what it is strange should require to
be exemplified in order to be understood—that a general proposition may
be of the greatest practical moment, although not absolutely true
without a single exception; and that in managing the affairs of great
aggregations of human beings, we must adapt our rules to the nine
hundred and ninety-nine cases, and not to the thousandth extraordinary
case, “ ’Tis certain,” says Hume (in a remarkable passage quoted by our
author), “that general principles, however intricate they may seem, must
always, if they are just and sound, prevail in the general course of
things, though they may fail in particular cases; and it is the chief
business of philosophers to regard the general course of things. I may
add, that it is also the chief business of politicians, especially in
the domestic government of the state, when the public good, which is or
ought to be their object, depends on the concurrence of a multitude of
causes—not as in foreign politics, upon accidents and chances, and the
caprices of a few persons.”[*]

“The views of political reasoning here advocated,” continues our author,
“might be confirmed by an appeal to some of our ablest writers;” and
among other apt quotations, he adds two from Burke, whom Conservatives
of all denominations glorify as an oracle, because on one great occasion
his prejudices coincided with theirs, but for whose authority they have
not a shadow of respect when it tells against their vulgar errors.

Far [says our author] from regarding deductions from human nature as
vain or frivolous, or leading to what are usually honoured by the
designation of wild theories, he considers such deductions as opposed to
speculative views, and as proceeding on experience Thus, in his Letter
to the Sheriffs of Bristol, speaking of the plan of pacification pursued
in 1776, in reference to our colonies, he says, “That plan being built
on the nature of man, and the circumstances and habits of the two
countries, and not on any visionary speculations, perfectly answered its
end.”[†] And in his Speech on Economical Reform he tells the House, “I
propose to economize by principle, that is, I propose to put affairs
into that train, which Edition: current; Page: [22] experience points
out as the most effectual from the nature of things, and from the
constitution of the human mind.”[*]

(Pp. 30-1.)

If principles of politics cannot be founded, as Burke says, “on the
nature of man,” on what can they be founded? On history? But is there a
single fact in history which can be interpreted but by means of
principles drawn from human nature? We will suppose your fact made out:
the thing happened (we will admit) as you affirm it did; but who shall
tell what produced it?—the only question you want answered. On this
subject our author has some instructive remarks, which we regret that
our limits do not permit us to quote, as well as to corroborate by some
others which we think necessary to complete the analysis of the subject.
It is well worthy to be treated in a separate article.

It may be interesting to collate with our author’s refutation of the
Edinburgh Reviewer, what the writer, who was the principal object of the
reviewer’s attack, has deemed it needful to say in his defence. This is
to be found in pp. 277 to 292 of a recent volume, entitled A Fragment on
Mackintosh,[†] where it is shown that the necessity of identification of
interest between the rulers and the ruled, and the probability
(amounting practically to certainty) that, in so far as that
identification is incomplete, the rulers will pursue their separate
interest, to the detriment of the ruled, has been recognised as the
foundation of political wisdom by almost all its greatest masters,
ancient and modern. Well may the writer exclaim—“It is mortifying to
find one’s self under the necessity of vindicating the wisdom of ages”
against what he calls (not too severely) “pitiful objections.”[‡]

aFrom bthisb principle, of the necessity of identifying the interest of
the government with that of the people, most of the practical maxims of
a representative government are corollaries. All popular institutions
are means towards rendering the identity of interest more complete. We
say more complete, because (and this it is important to remark)
perfectly complete it can never be. An approximation is all that is, in
the nature of things, possible. By pushing to its utmost extent the
accountability of governments to the people, you indeed take away from
them the power of prosecuting their own interests at the expense of the
people by force, but you leave to them the whole range and compass of
fraud. An attorney is accountable to his Edition: current; Page: [23]
client, and removable at his client’s pleasure; but we should scarcely
say that his interest is identical with that of his client. When the
accountability is perfect, the interest of rulers approximates more and
more to identity with that of the people, in proportion as the people
are more enlightened. The identity would be perfect, only if the people
were so wise, that it should no longer be practicable to employ deceit
as an instrument of government: a point of advancement only one stage
below that at which they could do without government altogether; at
least, without force, and penal sanctions, not (of course) without
guidance, and organized co-operation.

Identification of interest between the rulers and the ruled, being,
therefore, in a literal sense, impossible to be realized, cmust notc be
spoken of as a condition which a government must absolutely fulfil; but
as an end to be incessantly aimed at, and approximated to as nearly as
circumstances render possible, and as is compatible with the regard due
to other ends. For dthed identity of interest, even if it were wholly
attainable, not being the sole requisite of good government, expediency
may require that we should sacrifice some portion of it, or (to speak
more precisely) content ourselves with a somewhat less approximation to
it than might possibly be attainable, for the sake of some other end.

The only end, liable occasionally to conflict with that which we have
been insisting on, and at all comparable to it in importance—the only
other condition essential to good government—is this: That it be
government by a select body, not by the epeoplee collectively: That
political questions be not decided by an appeal, either direct or
indirect, to the judgment or will of an uninstructed mass, whether of
gentlemen or of clowns; but by the deliberately-formed opinions of a
comparatively few, specially educated for the task. This is an element
of good government which has existed, in a greater or less degree, in
some aristocracies, though unhappily not in our own; and has been the
cause of whatever reputation for prudent and skilful administration
those governments have enjoyed. It has seldom been found in any
aristocracies but those which were avowedly such. Aristocracies in the
guise of monarchies (such as those of England and France) have very
generally been aristocracies of idlers; while the others (such as Rome,
Venice, and Holland) might partially be considered as aristocracies of
experienced and laborious men. fBut of all governments, ancient or
modernf, the one by which this excellence is possessed in the most
eminent degree is the government of Prussia—a gmostg powerfully and
hskilfully organized aristocracy of allh the most highly educated men in
the kingdom. The British government in India partakes (with considerable
modifications) of the same character.

Edition: current; Page: [24]
iWherei this principle has been combined with other fortunate
circumstances, and particularly (as in Prussia) with circumstances
rendering the popularity of the government almost a necessary condition
of its security, a very considerable degree of good government has
occasionally been produced, jevenj without any express accountability to
the people. Such fortunate circumstances, however, are seldom to be
reckoned upon. But though the principle of government by persons
specially brought up to it will not suffice to produce good government,
good government cannot be had without it; and the grand difficulty in
politics will for a long time be, how best to conciliate the two great
elements on which good government depends; to combine the greatest
amount of the advantage derived from the independent judgment of a
specially instructed kFew, with the greatest degree of the security for
rectitude of purpose derived from rendering those Few responsible to the
Many.

What is necessary, however, to make the two ends perfectly reconcilable,
is a smaller matter than might at first sight be supposed. It is not
necessary that the Manyk should themselves be perfectly wise; it is
sufficient, if they be duly sensible of the value of superior wisdom. It
is sufficient if they be aware, that the majority of political questions
turn upon considerations of which they, and all persons not trained for
the purpose, must necessarily be very imperfect judges; and that their
judgment must in general be exercised rather upon the characters and
talents of the persons whom they appoint to decide these questions for
them, than upon the questions themselves. They would then select as
their representatives those whom the general voice of the instructed
pointed out as the most instructed; and would retain them, so long as no
symptom was manifested in their conduct of being under the influence of
interests or of feelings at variance with the public welfare. This
implies no greater wisdom in the people than the very ordinary wisdom,
of knowing what things they are and are not sufficient judges of. If the
bulk of any nation possess a fair share of this wisdom, the argument for
universal suffrage, so far as respects that people, is irresistible:
for, the experience of ages, and especially of all great national
emergencies, bears out the assertion, that whenever the multitude are
really alive to the necessity of superior intellect, they rarely fail to
distinguish those who possess it.a

The opinions which we have been stating are substantially those of our
author: from whose pages we now proceed to exemplify their application.

From the principle that the interest of the ruling body should be as
closely as possible identified with that of the people, follow most of
the conclusions respecting the constitution of the supreme legislature,
which are commonly Edition: current; Page: [25] contended for by the
thorough reformers. Such are—first, that the utmost possible publicity
should be given to the proceedings of parliament: secondly, that its
members should be elected at stated periods: thirdly, that these periods
should be short; sufficiently so, to render the sense of responsibility
a perpetual, not an occasional feeling. Our author thinks, with most of
the complete reformers, that three years are “the longest period
consistent with a salutary sense of accountableness.” (P. 203.)
Fourthly, the votes at elections must be so taken, as to express the
real sentiments of the electors, and not the sentiments merely of some
person who has the means of bribing or of coercing them. This, where
there are great inequalities of fortune, and where the majority of all
classes but the richest are more or less in a dependent condition,
requires that the votes be taken in secret. All these topics are handled
in our author’s best manner. We shall quote one passage from near the
end of the discussion on the ballot; and should have extended our
quotation, had not the subject been so recently and so fully treated by
ourselves.[*] After replying to some of the common objections on the
ballot, our author says—

The great opposition to secret voting does not, however, arise from the
consideration of its being unmanly or un-English, or leading to
insincerity and deception, but from a deeper source—from a feeling which
many who entertain it perhaps would not avow even to themselves,
although others make no scruple of publicly declaring it. The higher
classes fear to commit the election of legislators to the genuine
sentiments of the people. They have so long exercised a power over the
community, by means of the brute force of rank and riches applied to the
hopes and fears of those below them, that they have accustomed
themselves to regard it as a salutary and even necessary control. It has
relieved them too from a great part of the trouble of being intelligent,
active, and virtuous. They have found it much easier to arrive at the
office of legislator, by throwing away a few thousand pounds for a seat,
or ejecting a few miserable tenants as a terror to the rest, than by
winning affection through their virtues, or commanding esteem by their
superior intelligence and well-directed activity. To men accustomed to
domineer over the wills of their fellow-creatures, it is intolerably
irksome to be reduced to the necessity of appealing to their
understandings. Having been obliged to concede, nevertheless, a more
popular system of representation, having been reduced to the necessity
of ostensibly yielding the elective franchise to those who never before
possessed it, they are unwilling to trust the real exercise of it to the
parties on whom it is conferred by law. They consent to confide the
privilege to a popular constituency, but only as instruments to receive
a direction from a higher guidance. They cannot bear the idea for a
moment of trusting the machinery to work by its own inherent power. They
therefore oppose a system of voting which would snatch this domination
out of their hands—which would really give to the people what the law
professes to bestow upon them, which would effect what has never yet
been effected in this country, that the issue of the elections should
express the genuine sense of the constituent body. Here indeed Edition:
current; Page: [26] would be an end to all the despotic sway of rank and
riches; by this would be established the fatal necessity of combining
them with moral and intellectual excellence: on this system there would
be a lamentable predominance conferred on talents and virtues. Those
theretore do perfectly right to oppose the ballot, who fear that it
would annihilate that unjust influence in elections which they have
hitherto enjoyed from mere wealth and station; who are apprehensive that
to maintain themselves on the vantage-ground where they have been set
down by fortune, they would have to task all their faculties: who recoil
from the labour of thought, and shrink from the hardship of being
useful. All those, in a word, who wish to retain any unfair domination
over others in the business of elections, should rouse themselves to
resist the adoption of the ballot, as utterly destructive of the object
of their desires.

(Pp. 296-8.)

We believe this to be a true picture of the feelings of at least the
most powerful class among the enemies of popular institutions.
Experience proves but too truly, that “to men accustomed to domineer
over the wills of their fellow-creatures, it is intolerably irksome to
be reduced to the necessity of appealing to their understandings.” The
hands which have ruled by force will not submit to rule by persuasion. A
generation at least must elapse, before an aristocracy will consent to
seek by fair means the power they have been used to exercise by foul.
And yet, their portion of importance under popular institutions is no
niggardly one, unless made so by their own perverseness. In every
country where there are rich and poor, the administration of public
affairs would, even under the most democratic constitution, be mainly in
the hands of the rich; as has been the case in all the republics of the
old world, ancient and modern. Not only have the wealthy and leisured
classes ten times the means of acquiring personal influence, ten times
the means of acquiring intellectual cultivation, which any other person
can bring into competition with them; but the very jealousies, supposed
to be characteristic of democracy, conspire to the same result. Men are
more jealous of being commanded by their equals in fortune and
condition, than by their superiors. Political power will generally be
the rich man’s privilege, as heretofore; but it will no longer be born
with him, nor come to him, as heretofore, while he is asleep. He must
not only resign all corrupt advantage from its possession, but he must
pay the price for it of a life of labour. More than this: he must
consent to associate with his poorer fellow-citizens, as if there
existed between him and them something like human feelings, and must
give over treating them as if they were a race to be kept coldly at a
distance—a sort of beings connected with him by a less tie of sympathy
than the brute animals of his household. Under really popular
institutions, the higher classes must give up either this anti-social
and inhuman feeling, or their political influence. Surely no good,
hardly even any rational person, to whom the alternative was offered,
would hesitate about the choice.

Is it not, then, a melancholy reflection, that in England (and in
England, Edition: current; Page: [27] we believe, alone, among the great
European nations) the youth of the aristocratic classes are even more
intensely aristocratic than their fathers—more wedded to all that is
most noxious in the privileges of their class—animated by a more violent
hostility to those tendencies of their age, in accommodating themselves
to which lies their sole chance of either being at ease in it, or
exercising any beneficial influence over it? And how deeply ought this
thought to impress upon us the necessity, the pressing and immediate
necessity, of a radical reform in those institutions of education, which
mould these youthful minds, and cherish, when they ought to counteract,
the baneful influences exercised over them by the accident of their
social position?

The question, Who should compose the constituency? is the next which
presents itself. This is rather a more complicated question than any of
the preceding, having to be decided by a compromise between conflicting
considerations.

By making the members of the sovereign legislature elective, by sending
them back to their constituents at short intervals, and by taking the
votes in secret, we provide for the identity of their interest with that
of the electors. But what if the interest of the electors differs from
that of the community? We have then only an oligarchy of electors,
instead of an oligarchy of senators. There is not the slightest reason
for supposing that the former oligarchy will be less tenacious of its
separate interest than the other, or less ready to sacrifice the public
interest to it. Not only must the interest of the representatives be
made, so far as possible, coincident with that of the electors, but the
interest of the electors must be made coincident with the interest of
the whole people.

If this principle were to be followed out, without limitation from any
other principle, it would, we conceive, lead to universal suffrage.
Imposing authorities, it is true, have held that a portion of the people
may be found, much less than the whole, whose interest, so far as
government is concerned, is identical with that of the whole. A portion
might undoubtedly be found, less than the whole, whose interest would
generally lie in good government, and only occasionally in bad. But
complete identity of interest appears to us to be unattainable: (we are
speaking, of course, as our argument requires, of selfish interest.)*
The identity which is contended for cannot be identity Edition: current;
Page: [28] in all things, but only in those which properly fall within
the province of government. The payers of wages, for instance, and the
receivers, have opposite interests on the question of high or low wages;
but as this is a question in which the interference of government cannot
be really beneficial to either, the interest of both, so far as relates
to the purposes of government, is (it may be contended) the same.
Admitting, however (which is more than we are prepared to admit), that
there exists no mode in which the middle classes could really benefit
their selfish interests at the expense of the poorer class, by means of
their exclusive possession of the government; still, when there is a
real diversity of interest between two parties, although confined to
matters with which law cannot beneficially interfere, and the powers of
law are in the hands of one party, it is rarely that we do not witness
some Edition: current; Page: [29] attempt, well or ill advised, to make
those powers instrumental to the peculiar purposes of the one party; and
if these purposes are not thereby compassed, yet the interests of the
other party often suffer exceedingly by the means used to compass them.
Such, for example, were the laws against combinations of workmen;[*] and
the laws which have existed at some periods of our history, fixing a
maximum of wages. Nor is the evil annihilated although the excluded be a
minority: the small number of the oppressed diminishes the profits of
oppression, but does not always weaken the feelings which lead to it. Is
the interest of the free blacks in the northern states of America the
same with that of the whites? If so, why are they a kind of outcasts? So
long, therefore, as any person capable of an independent will is
excluded from the elective franchise, we cannot think that the evils of
Edition: current; Page: [30] misgovernment, in so far as liable to arise
from a diversity of interest between the ruling body and the community,
are entirely guarded against.

There are, however, other evils to be contended with, besides those
arising from diversity of interest; and granting, that, by the exclusion
of one class from the suffrage, something must be given up of the
identity of interest between the constituency and the entire community,
yet if some purpose of more than equivalent utility be attained by the
sacrifice, it may still be advisable. And this, in our author’s opinion,
is the case. He proposes that a certain portion of identity of interest
should be sacrificed, for the sake of obtaining a higher average degree
of intelligence. That this is an object worth attaining at some cost,
nobody will deny. A certain measure of intelligence in the electors is
manifestly indispensable: a much larger measure would be eminently
desirable; and if any test, even an approximative one, could be obtained
of its existence, without trenching too much upon the identity of
interest, the exclusion from the franchise of all who could not pass
that test would add to the securities for good government. But when our
author contends that such an approximative test may be found in the
possession of a certain amount of property, we can only partially agree
with him. It is but fair to quote the passage.

We must admit at once, that it [the possession of property] is a very
inexact criterion [of knowledge;] and in regard to some classes, no
criterion at all. It is not true that knowledge is in proportion to
wealth. A man of 50,000l. a year would probably be found less
intelligent and capable of discrimination than a man of 1000l. Great
wealth relaxes the motives to exertion, and efficient knowledge is not
to be attained without labour. Place a man in boundless affluence, and
(to use a phrase of a masterly writer) you shelter and weather-fend him
from the elements of experience.[*]

When, however, we descend lower in the scale, we find a different
result. People who are raised above the necessity of manual toil can
afford to cultivate their minds, and have time and motives for giving
some attention to the acquisition of knowledge. One of the first effects
of wealth on those who acquire it, is a desire to bestow a liberal
education on their children, which of itself tends to maintain a
superiority on the side of the rich. Knowledge, like many other things,
is an article not readily acquired without pecuniary expense, nor yet
without leisure; and, as a general rule, those who can afford to make
the necessary outlay of time and money will have the greatest quantity
of the commodity. Thus, people of two hundred a year will be found on
the average to possess more extensive knowledge than people of fifty
pounds a year, and the possessors of two thousand more than those of two
hundred Numerous exceptions to this rule will present themselves; but it
is sufficient that it prevails on the whole, and affords the best
criterion which we can obtain. If it holds on the whole, it will be
practically useful.

(Pp. 231-2.)

Edition: current; Page: [31]
These propositions must, we think, be greatly qualified. They are true
until we rise above the class which cannot read, or which never does
read, and consequently takes no interest in political affairs; for
though the intelligence of many people does not come to them by reading,
the habit of applying that intelligence to public matters commonly does.
But when, ascending in the scale, we reach a class which habitually
reads, especially which reads newspapers, we suspect that we attain as
high an average of intelligence as is to be found in any class not
expressly bred and educated for some intellectual profession. We are
speaking, of course, of England: in any country possessing a really
national education, both for rich and poor, the case, we allow, would be
different. But in this country, and at this time, between an average
Birmingham gun-maker, an average London shopkeeper, and an average
country gentleman, we suspect the differences of intelligence are more
apparent than real. The land-holder, we find, has just as little
foresight of the consequences of his actions; miscalculates as
egregiously in his own conduct, both public and private; hates just as
intensely all who, from however patriotic motives, set themselves
against any of the things which he likes; despises as sincerely, under
the name of theorists and visionaries, all who see farther than himself;
is as incapable of feeling the force of any arguments which conflict
with his own opinion of his immediate and direct interest. These are the
tests of intelligence, and not the being able to repeat Propria quœ
maribus.[*] If the bulk of our operative manufacturers are to be
excluded from the suffrage, it must be, we suspect, on quite other
grounds than inferiority of intelligence to those who are permitted to
exercise it.

We have never been able to understand why, if the real object in
excluding poverty were to exclude ignorance and vice, the test should
not be applied to ignorance and vice directly, and not to something
which is a mere presumption of their existence. It would be easy to
exclude all who cannot read, write, and cipher. If a higher test be
desirable, there would be no great difficulty in contriving it. If there
were here (as there are in Prussia, and as there would be in every
country where the good of the people was cared for) schools for all,
under the superintendence of the state, the test might be a certificate
from the teacher at the public or some other school, of having passed
creditably through it. A test of morality would, in the present state of
society, be not so easy to devise; something, however, might be done
towards it. To have been seen drunk, during the year previous, might be
a disqualification at the annual registry. To have received parish
relief during Edition: current; Page: [32] the same time, might be
equally so. Conviction for any criminal offence might disqualify for a
longer period, or for ever.

The most rational argument which we can conceive, for the exclusion of
those who are called persons of no property, would be founded, not on
inferiority of intellect, but on difference in apparent interest. All
classes (it might be said) are in a most imperfect state of intelligence
and knowledge; so much so, that they cannot be expected to be, and, as
experience shows, hardly ever are, accessible to any views of their own
ultimate interest which rest upon a train of reasoning. Since, then, it
is certain that those who enjoy the franchise will exercise it in the
manner dictated, not by their real and distant, but by their apparent
and immediate interest, let us at least select, as the depositaries of
power, those whose apparent and immediate interest is allied with the
great principles on which society rests, the security of property, and
the maintenance of the authority of law. These, we are sure, are safe in
the hands of the possessors of property: an equal regard for them on the
part of those without property would suppose a much higher degree of
intelligence, since the latter benefit by them so much less obviously
and directly, though not less really, than the former.

This places the question on a distinct and tangible issue; namely,
whether the body of the operatives, or that portion of the body whom the
rest follow, do in fact entertain opinions or feelings at variance with
any of the primary principles of good government. This is a question not
of argument, but of fact; and as such we think the question of universal
suffrage ought always to be considered. That the prevalence of such
mischievous opinions and feelings, and the difficulty of eradicating
them where they exist, are vastly exaggerated, we have good reason to be
assured: to what extent they really are entertained, we have no means of
accurately knowing; and our belief is, that almost all persons of what
are called the educated classes, if they have any opinion on the point,
have it without evidence.

Happily there is no necessity for a speedy decision of the question.
Many important things are yet to be done, before universal suffrage can
even be brought seriously into discussion: and it will probably never be
introduced, unless preceded by such improvements in popular education as
will greatly weaken the apprehensions at present entertained of it. The
middle classes, too, if freed from the coercive power of the rich, have
an interest absolutely identical with that of the community on all the
questions likely to engage much of the attention of parliament for many
years to come; and no one is disposed to deny that we ought cautiously
to feel our way, and watch well the consequences of each extension of
the suffrage before venturing upon another. With a people like the
English, whose feelings are not apt to be kindled by an abstract
principle, but only by a practical grievance, very ordinary prudence
would enable us to stop short at the point where good Edition: current;
Page: [33] government is practically attained.

We return to the volume before us, from which we shall not again permit
ourselves to stray so far.

Our author brings forward, with the prominence which justly belongs to
them, several of the requisites of a well-constituted representative
government, the importance of which is still far from being adequately
felt. One is, that the supreme legislature should be relieved from the
weight of purely local business which now oppresses it, by the
establishment of subordinate representative assemblies.

Every district, [says he,] would not only send representatives to the
supreme assembly, but have its own domestic legislature for provincial
purposes; in which all matters relating to its roads, bridges, prisons,
court-houses, and assessments, and other points concerning itself alone,
might be determined. In England, at present, large sums are collected
under the name of county rates, and expended (frequently with lavish
profusion) under the control of the magistrates at quarter-sessions, who
virtually do part of what is here assigned to a district assembly; while
of the rest, some is neglected, and some is done in a hasty and slovenly
manner by Parliament.

Such a district assembly would be the proper body to take cognizance of
all projects for canals, rail-roads, gas-works, water-works, and other
undertakings, which, on account of trespassing on private property,
could not be executed without the authority of the law. Every one must
see at a glance how great would be the relief to the national
legislature, if all these minor matters were resigned to other bodies
more competent to deal with them. Nec deus intersit nisi dignus vindice
nodus,[*] should be the principle of the supreme assembly. It should
rigorously abstain from doing what can be done as well or better without
its interference, and direct its undivided energies to those points
which involve the welfare of the whole empire, or which subordinate
powers are incompetent to effect.

On all the subjects mentioned as the proper business of subordinate
authorities, the supreme legislature might pass general regulations in
strict accordance with the principle here maintained. It might enact,
for instance, certain general provisions in regard to the making of
canals; but whether a particular canal should be made between two towns
in Yorkshire might be left for Yorkshire itself to decide. The supreme
legislature would also determine the objects and define the powers of
the subordinate legislatures, and be the ultimate court of appeal in all
cases of difference and difficulty amongst them.

It is evidently one of the worst possible arrangements, that the time of
the supreme legislative assembly, which would find ample occupation in
the preparation and perfecting of general enactments, should be taken up
with matters of only local interest, and sometimes of merely individual
concern; that it should be occupied with bills for changing names,
alienating estates, supplying towns with water and lighting them by gas.
While this continues to be the case, it is both morally and physically
impossible there can be that degree of excellence in Edition: current;
Page: [34] legislation, which the present state of knowledge admits. It
is a system which acts injuriously in both directions; a system on which
neither enactments of a local nor those of a national kind can possibly
be of the same beneficial character as if the preparation of them were
devolved on separate assemblies.

(Pp. 93-5.)

On this question, which has already occupied ourselves, and to which we
shall return again and again, this is not the place to enlarge.

Another change for which our author earnestly contends, is a large
reduction in the numbers of the House of Commons. This had already been
advocated by Mr. Bulwer, in his England and the English,[*] and was one
of the many points in which that valuable work was in advance of the
public mind. “Large assemblies,” our author justly observes [p. 161],
“are unfit for deliberation;” and the immense consumption of the time of
parliament, and neglect of the real business of the nation, which arises
from the struggles of several hundred men, of few ideas and many words,
to give their vocabulary an airing, is gradually forcing upon thinking
persons the conviction, that, as our author proposes, the House should
be reduced to one-half or one-third of its present numbers. A step,
though but a small one, was made towards this important improvement by
the first Reform Bill,[†] which broke in upon the magical number, 658;
and it is to be regretted that the principle was given up, in deference
to the most hypocritical clamour ever raised by Tories under the false
pretence of zeal for popular rights. To diminish the number of the
members of the House of Commons was treated as diminishing the amount of
popular representation! As well might it be said, that the Spartans had
twice as much government as we have, because they had two kings, while
we have but one. Popular government does not consist in having the work
done by more hands than are necessary to do it, but in having those
hands, whether few or many, subject to popular control.

To the other strong reasons for reducing the numbers of the House, will
sooner or later be added one of economy. We mean, of course, when the
members are paid—a change to which we shall certainly come, and of which
our author is a warm advocate:

This expedient, [says he,] seems to be required at all events, in order
to secure the services of the ablest men, and to give the greatest
intensity to the motives which impel the mind of the legislator to apply
itself to the difficulties of the task, as well as to enhance the
vigilance of the constituent body, by teaching them the value of his
services, and of their own suffrages, in a way which the dullest amongst
them can understand. Under such an arrangement, men of energetic and
comprehensive minds, trained to vigorous personal and intellectual
exertion, but who are obliged to devote themselves to pursuits yielding
a profitable return, and are consequently at present either excluded
from the legislature, or are mere Edition: current; Page: [35] cyphers
in it, would be, with all their faculties, at the command of the public.
Men of this description, so gifted, and so placed above private cares,
would be invaluable; for instead of giving that lazy gentlemanly
attention to public questions, which, in their own apprehension at
least, is all that can be reasonably expected from unpaid
representatives living in luxurious opulence; or that casual and
intermitting, and brief attendance on their duties, which is all that
professional practitioners can bestow, they would make their legislative
functions the business of their lives. Strenuous intellectual exertion,
except in the case of a few extraordinary minds to which it is a
pleasure, as severe corporeal exercise is to a man of great muscular
strength, is irksome, and seldom habitually undertaken without a
powerful external motive. It is surely policy in a nation to furnish
this motive for due application to national affairs.

(Pp. 193-4.)

In nearly all ages and countries, popular governments have found it for
their interest that all the functionaries whom they employ should be
paid. The unpaid is apt to become the self-paid, and to cost dearest of
all: his work, at the best, is dilettante work, and is put aside from
the smallest call of business or pleasure. Moreover, an unpaid
legislature and an unpaid magistracy are institutions essentially
aristocratic: contrivances for keeping legislation and judicature in the
hands exclusively of those who can afford to serve without pay. This in
itself may seem but a small consideration: the important matter is not
by whom we are governed, but how:—with due securities for their being
properly qualified, we should not complain, although the whole
legislature were composed of millionnaires. But those securities are
themselves weakened, by narrowing the range of the people’s choice. It
is matter of general remark, how few able men have appeared of late
years in parliament. What wonder? when, of the able men whom the country
produces, nine-tenths at least are of the class who cannot serve without
pay; and, for the first time since the constitution assumed its modern
form, the members of the House of Commons are now practically unpaid.
The rich have advantages in their leisure, and command of the means of
instruction, which will render it easy for them, whenever they exert
themselves, to be the ablest men in the community. That they do not take
this trouble, is precisely because they are not exposed to the
competition of the non-rich. Let in that competition upon them, if you
would have them improve. In political, as in all other occupations, if
you would stimulate exertion, you must throw open all monopolies.

If the members of the legislature were paid, legislation would
become—what, to be well discharged, it must become—a profession: the
study and the occupation of a laborious life. On this point our author’s
remarks are well worthy of an attentive perusal:

While the current of life flows on smoothly, the interest which each
individual has in good government evidently makes little impression on
his imagination, it consists, for the most part, of small fractions of
benefit scarcely appreciable, of Edition: current; Page: [36] protection
from evils, to which, as they are prevented from occurring, he is
insensible; of advantages, which, to a superficial view, accrue to him
only under particular circumstances, such as redress of wrong when he
has occasion to appeal to the law. Most people are therefore supine and
indifferent as to the general course of domestic policy, and especially
indifferent as to the intellectual qualifications and conduct of their
representatives. Their minds want awakening to the difficulty and
importance of sound and accurate and systematic legislation. They may
rest assured, that, in our complicated state of society, it is a
business which requires as long and assiduous preparation as any
profession which can be named; and as entire devotion to it, when its
duties are once undertaken, as the calling of a lawyer or a physician, a
merchant or an engineer. One chief reason why there are so many
needless, blundering, crude, mischievous, and unintelligible enactments,
is, that men have not dedicated themselves to legislation as a separate
study or profession, but have considered it to be a business which might
be played with in their hours of leisure from pursuits requiring intense
exertion.

(Pp. 186-7.)

Political science is perhaps that department of intellectual exertion
which requires the greatest powers of mind, and the intensest
application. Its facts are multifarious and complicated, often anomalous
and contradictory, and demanding the guidance of clear principles, its
principles are many of them abstruse, and to be developed only by long
and close processes of reasoning; and the application of these
principles requires the sagacity of quick observation and long
experience. The whole business calls for that familiarity of mind with
the subject, which can be the result of nothing but habitual daily
devotion to it.

In making laws, too, not only is there a demand for powers of mind to
cope with the disorder and complication of facts, and the abstruseness
of reasoning, but there ought to be also a complete mastery of language,
that nice and delicate instrument of thought and communication, by the
clumsy handling of which so much confusion and uncertainty is yearly
produced in legislative enactments. Every word in a law is of
importance; every sentence ought to exhibit that perfectness of
expression which is to be looked for only from the skill and caution of
undistracted minds. Well might Bentham observe, that the words of a law
ought to be weighed like diamonds.

Is this, then, a matter to be dealt with by an exhausted professional
man in what should be his hours of recreation? Can such a one be
competent to a task hard enough for the mind which comes to it every day
with all its vigour fresh, all its perspicacity undimmed, its spirit of
activity unworn, and its feelings of interest unabsorbed? Is the refuse
of an individual’s time and abilities what a people are to be content
with from a representative to whom they confide the determination of
measures in which their prosperity is deeply implicated? Is this
sufficient for governing the destinies of a great nation?

(Pp. 184-6.)

Our author carries the practical application of this doctrine so far, as
to propose (though, as he says, with some diffidence) that freedom from
other business or professional avocation should be an indispensable
qualification for being chosen a member of parliament. There is no doubt
that it ought to be a strong recommendation, but we would not exact it
by express law. It will occasionally happen, though, under a better
system, much less Edition: current; Page: [37] often than at present,
that half the time of one competitor is of more value than the whole
time of another; and when the electoral body is rightly constituted, we
know not why its choice should be fettered. We would not give power by
handfuls with one hand, and take it back in spoonfuls with the other. If
the people can be trusted at all, it is not in the estimation of these
obvious grounds of disqualification that they are likely to be found
deficient.* In the present state of society, the effect of the provision
which our author desires to introduce would, we fear, be seriously
mischievous: it would throw the whole business of legislation, and of
control over the executive, into the hands of the idlers; excluding from
parliament almost the only persons who bring habits of application and
capacity for business into it. This objection, no doubt, would not
exist, or at least not in the same degree, under the increased
responsibility to the people which our author’s argument contemplates.

Neither would we, with our author [p. 181], require as a legal
qualification “maturity of years,” beyond that which is now required. It
will not, we suppose, be denied that a young man may render good service
in Parliament; and if so, it may be that you have no other person who
will render it as well. It might be proper enough to treat youth as a
disqualification, if we were sure of finding old men suitable to our
purpose: but considering the scarcity of fit men at any age, and the
abundance of unfit men at all ages, we would not risk depriving
ourselves of even one of the former for the sake of shutting out myriads
of the latter. If your electors are likely persons to choose an unfit
man, no sweeping rule of exclusion will prevent them from finding one.
Nor do we see in so strong a light as our author the danger to be
guarded against. It is not probable that, under any system but one of
private nomination, very young men would ever compose any considerable
proportion of the legislature: already the Reform Bill is understood to
have excluded from the House most of the idle young men of family who
formerly composed so large a portion of it: when, too, provincial
assemblies, properly representative of the people, shall have been
established, young men will serve their apprenticeship to public
business there rather than in parliament. Those who Edition: current;
Page: [38] are chosen in spite of so strong a ground of just prejudice,
are likely to be among the ablest of their years; and, at least in an
age of movement, it is not among young men that the greatest measure of
political incapacity is usually found. It is true, as our author says,
that “in legislation, as in other arts, there is a tact, a nicety of
judgment, an intuitive apprehension of the relations of things, a wisdom
which age, indeed, does not always bring, but which age alone can
bestow.” [P. 180.] But the young members will not be called upon to be
the actual framers of laws: they will only assist in judging of them.
The general spirit and direction of the proceedings of the House will be
determined by that immense majority of its members who will always be
persons of mature years; and it would not be altogether useless to
counteract the apathy and prejudice of age by a small infusion even of
the conceit and dogmatism of youth. Age is naturally conservative, and
unless some weight be placed in the other scale, there will be danger
lest the timid and sluggish should give too much of their character to
the entire mass.

Our author strongly condemns the degrading practice of canvassing. In a
healthy state of moral feeling, to solicit an elector would be deemed an
exactly similar insult to that of soliciting a juror.

If the moral sentiments of the community had not been debased on this
point by the long prevalence of a corrupt practice, they would feel that
there was something not only degrading but ludicrous in the procedure of
a candidate, who circulates himself from house to house for the purpose
of soliciting votes from electors as so many gracious boons. On the
supposition that the candidate happens to be really the best man for the
office, it is asking them to have the condescension and kindness to
consult their own interest out of pure favour to him. On the supposition
that he is otherwise, it is craving them to be so exceedingly liberal
and obliging as to disregard their own interest, and give a preference
to his. In the one case, the request bears no mark of wisdom; in the
other, none of modesty: in both cases, it is utterly inconsistent with
manly independence.

It is true, that what is called canvassing does not necessarily assume
this form. A candidate, when personally visiting the electors at their
own homes, may limit himself to an explanation of his opinions, and to a
proper and dignified exposition of his qualifications for the office,
without stooping to the ludicrousness or servility of craving as a boon
what ought to be either withheld, or given because it is the interest at
once and the duty of the elector to give it. But even in this case, mark
the inefficiency, the uselessness, of a personal visit; consider in what
degree the candidate can set forth his pretensions in the few minutes
which he can dedicate to the task of enlightening the minds of the
individual electors on the subject of his merits and opinions. How
degrading soever the procedure may be, there is some purpose answered by
visiting a man, even for a few minutes, with the view of prevailing on
him to give a promise, a few minutes may suffice for obtaining from him
a yes or a no: but to devote to him only so brief a period, with the
view of enabling him to form a judgment of the qualifications of the
candidate, is a fruitless sacrifice of time and labour, for a purpose
which can be effectually accomplished by public addresses. Of this folly
few, it may be presumed, are guilty. The usual object of a personal
canvass is to sway the will, not Edition: current; Page: [39] to guide
or enlighten the judgment; and it must be admitted to produce in general
a considerable effect. The more servile the candidate shows himself to
be, the freer from scruples, from dignity, and self-respect, the fuller
of artifices in adapting himself to the feelings and prejudices of the
electors, so much the greater is his success likely to prove.

In every way in which the system of canvassing can be regarded, it is
evil: there is nothing to recommend it; and if it prevails in any
country where public sentiment does not promise to put it down, it
perhaps might be put down with advantage by a legal prohibition. The
experiment of prohibiting candidates and their friends from canvassing
has been tried by some public charitable institutions in the election of
their officers, and has proved decidedly beneficial in the few instances
which have occurred since the adoption of the rule.

(Pp. 305-8.)

We can add nothing to this masterly exposure.

Our author is no less decided in his condemnation of the practice of
giving instructions to representatives, and of requiring pledges from
candidates. We fully concur in his sentiments. The business of the
constituency is to select as their representative the person best
qualified, morally and intellectually, to form a sound judgment of his
own on political questions; and having done this, they are not to
require him to act according to their judgment, any more than they
require a physician to prescribe for them according to their own notions
of medicine.

Whenever we employ a man to do what his superior knowledge enables him
to do better than ourselves, it is because the superiority of his
knowledge, combined with his weaker disposition to promote our interest,
will, on the whole produce a better result than our inferior knowledge,
coupled with our stronger disposition. So it is when we appoint a
political deputy: we can obtain the benefit of his services only by
encountering the risk of trusting him. The advantage we look for at his
hands is incompatible with retaining the direction of his conduct.

(P. 127.)

It is not, then, to the power of instructing their representative, that
constituents are to look for an assurance that his efforts will be
faithfully applied to the public service, for that would be inconsistent
with the most enlightened legislation; but it is to the power of
reducing him from the elevation to which their suffrages have raised
him. What properly belongs to them is not a power of directing, but of
checking, not a power of previous dictation, but a power of reward and
punishment on a review of what he has done. The object to be obtained is
not to compel the representative to decide agreeably to the opinions of
his constituents, for that would be compelling him often to decide
against his better judgment: but it is to force him to decide with a
single view to the public good, and, at the same time, to obtain the
full benefit of his intelligence. It is by leaving him unshackled with
positive instructions, while he is subject to the ultimate tribunal of
the opinion of his constituents, that the end in view is to be
accomplished, of bringing into action, in the proceedings of the
legislature, the greatest practicable quantity of intelligence, under
the guidance of the purest disposition to promote the welfare of the
community.

The relation between a representative and his constituents may be
illustrated Edition: current; Page: [40] by a reference to the
analogical relation which exists, and to which we have already slightly
adverted, in the mutual circumstances of the physician and his patients.
The security which patients have for the best application of the
physician’s skill does not arise from any ability of theirs to direct
his practice, but from the circumstance of having in their own hands the
power of choice. In the nature of the case they must place great
confidence in his conduct, if they would obtain the benefit of his
knowledge. When they select him, they are guided by such evidence as is
within their reach respecting his qualifications. They may not always
make the wisest choice; because, not being competent judges of the
science, they must depend, in a great measure, on collateral facts, or
evidence of an indirect character, and are sometimes swayed by
irrelevant motives; but the power of selection and dismissal is the most
effectual means of securing the best services of those whom they choose;
and there can be little doubt that, on the system of each individual
selecting his own medical attendant, and trusting to his discretion,
patients fare better than on any other plan. And although they cannot
antecedently judge of the medical treatment necessary in their case, nor
direct the curative process, yet after recovery they can frequently form
a tolerable estimate of the skill which has been evinced, and can always
appreciate the care and attention of the practitioner; whence there are
evidently strong inducements acting on his mind to please and benefit
his patients.

(Pp. 129-31.)

We consider this point, as we have intimated in a former passage, to be
fundamental; and to constitute, in reality, the test whether a people be
ripe for the sound exercise of the power of complete control over their
governors, or not. The parallel holds exactly between the legislator and
the physician. The people themselves, whether of the high or the low
classes, are, or might be, sufficiently qualified to judge, by the
evidence which might be brought before them, of the merits of different
physicians, whether for the body politic or natural; but it is utterly
impossible that they should be competent judges of different modes of
treatment. They can tell that they are ill; and that is as much as can
rationally be expected from them. Intellects specially educated for the
task are necessary to discover and apply the remedy.

But though the principle that electors are to judge of men, and
representatives of measures (as a king or a minister appoints a general,
but does not instruct him when and how to fight) is of the very essence
of a representative government, we cannot dissemble the fact, that it is
a principle almost entirely inapplicable to the peculiar situation of
this kingdom at the present moment. How can electors be required to
repose in their representatives any trust which they can possibly
withhold, when, for the purpose of purifying a political system which
swarms with abuses, the circumstances of society oblige them to employ
as their agents men of the very classes for whose benefit all abuses
exist, and of whose disposition to reform any one particle of those
abuses which it is possible to preserve they feel the most well-grounded
doubts? Who can blame the exaction of pledges from such a man as the
honorable member for St. Andrew’s,[*] under the circumstances Edition:
current; Page: [41] in which those pledges were exacted?* We assume, of
course, that the constituency had not the option of electing a better
man. If they had, they have themselves to blame for not making use of
it. For, in the words of a passage quoted by our author from Roscommon’s
Letters for the Press—“When we have to employ our fellow-creatures in
any office, we should in general act more wisely were we to choose those
who possess qualities adapted to it, than were we to attempt to bend
unsuitable qualities to our purposes, by the force of motives applied
for the occasion.”[*] “There is one general consideration,” says our
author, “which deserves to be urged on electors, in their choice of a
representative: they must take the trouble to choose a fit man, and not
expect a man to become fit for the situation by being placed in it.” (P.
427.)

In the chapter “On the Introduction of Changes in Political
Institutions,” our author takes the opportunity of combating the
celebrated doctrine of Lord Holland and Sir James Mackintosh, that
“governments are not made, but grow.”[†] This maxim was probably
suggested by the numerous examples of political reformers whose
institutions have been ephemeral, for want of having a sufficient hold
upon the respect of the people to command steady obedience, or upon
their affections, to be defended with any zeal against assault. But
because governments, like other works of human contrivance, may be
constructed with insufficient foresight and skill, does it follow that
foresight and skill are utterly unavailing, and that no governments can
hope for the support of the people’s affections in times of
civilization, but those produced by the fortuitous concourse of atoms in
ages of barbarism? The doctrine is not only philosophically, but even
historically false. The laws of Moses, those of Mahomet, were made, and
did not grow: they had, it is true, Edition: current; Page: [42] the
direct sanction of religious faith; but the laws of Lycurgus, the laws
of Solon, were made, and were as durable as any laws which grew have
hitherto been found. Those of Lycurgus, indeed, stand in history a
monumentum ære perennius[*] of the practicability of Utopianism. Each of
the North American colonies made a government: the whole of them
confederated have also made a government—no bad example hitherto of
adaptation to the wants of the people who live under it. Frederic of
Prussia made a whole system of institutions, which still exists, and an
excellent one. Bonaparte made another, which also in substance still
exists, though an abominable one. All these governments, in so far as
they have have had any stability, had it because they were adapted to
the circumstances and wants of their age. That such adaptation can be
made by preconceived and systematic design, every one of them is an
example.

All that there is of truth in the favourite doctrine of Sir James
Mackintosh amounts to a truism, which in theory has never been
overlooked, howsoever in practice it may have been disregarded: That
legislators and political reformers must understand their own age: That
they must consider, not only what is best in itself, but what the people
will bear; not only what laws to make, but how to make the people obey
them: That they must forbear to establish any thing which, to make it
work, requires the continued and strenuous support of the people
themselves, unless, either in the ancient habits of the people, or at
least in their durable and strenuous convictions, a principle exists
which can be enlisted in favour of the new institution, and induce them
to give it that hearty assistance without which it must speedily become
inoperative. What has usually been wanting to the due observance of this
maxim has been, not the recognition of it, but a sufficient practical
sense, how great an element of stability that government wants which has
not the authority of time:

lHowl very much of the really wonderful acquiescence of mankind in any
government which they find established is the effect of mere habit and
imagination, and therefore depends upon the preservation of something
like continuity of existence in the institutions, and identity in their
outward forms; cannot transfer itself easily to new institutions, even
though in themselves preferable; and is greatly shaken when there occurs
anything like a break in the line of historical duration—anything which
can be termed the end of the old constitution and the beginning of a new
one.m The very fact that a certain set of political institutions already
Edition: current; Page: [43] exist, have long existed, and have become
associated with all the historical recollections of a people, is in
itself, as far as it goes, a property which adapts them to that people,
and gives them a great advantage over any new institutions in obtaining
that ready and willing resignation to what has once been decided by
lawful authority, which alone renders possible those innumerable
compromises between adverse interests and expectations, without which no
government could be carried onn a year, and with difficulty even for a
week.*

It is scarcely necessary to say that, in this country, and at this time,
the danger is not lest such considerations as the above should have too
little, but lest they should have too much, weight.

In the supplementary discourses of our author, on Political Equality,
and on Rights, there are many just observations on the confusion which
has been introduced into political reasoning by the use of vague and
declamatory expressions as substitutes for a distinct appeal to the good
of the community. Our author, however, while proposing to banish the
words “natural rights” from philosophical discussion, makes an attempt,
in which we do not think him quite successful, to discover a rational
meaning for the phrase. Without doubt, as in the case of all other
phrases which mankind use, there is something in their minds which they
are endeavouring to express by it; but we hardly think that our author
is looking for this in the right place. The subject, however, would lead
us too far for the present occasion.

Having said so much of what the work before us does contain, we cannot
conclude without drawing the author’s attention to one thing which it
should have contained and does not. He has met and overthrown many of
the fallacies by which the delivering over of the powers of government
to partial interests is wont to be defended; but he has nowhere directly
faced the master fallacy of all, the theory of class-representation,
though it is one which attacks the very foundation of his doctrines. The
theory in question maintains, that a good popular representation should
represent, not the people, but all the various classes or interests
among the people. The landed interest, it is said, should be
represented, the mercantile interest should be represented; the monied,
manufacturing, shipping interests, the lawyers, the clergy—each of these
bodies should command the election of a certain number of members of the
legislature; and the bulk of the people, it is commonly added, Edition:
current; Page: [44] should also have the nomination of a certain small
number of representatives. The essence of this system is, that it
proposes to place a small fraction only of the ruling body under any
inducements from their position to consult the general interest of the
community; while it renders all the remainder the mere attorneys of
certain small knots and confederacies of men, each of which, the theory
itself admits, has a private interest of its own, which sinister
interest, if it possessed the undivided control of the legislature, it
would ruthlessly pursue, to the complete sacrifice of the general
interest. The expectation then is, that because the ruling power is
divided among several of these knots, instead of being wholly bestowed
upon one of them, they, instead of combining, as they have the strongest
motives to do, and sharing the benefits of misrule among them, will,
with an incapacity of pursuing their obvious interest, unknown to any
tribe of savages, employ their whole exertions in protecting the
community against one another. Whether this be likely to be the fact let
English history speak; for England has been ruled by a
class-representation ever since the revolution. We subjoin an apologue,
from a speech delivered in 1826, which shadows forth very faithfully
what has been the course of history in this particular.*

Edition: current; Page: [45]
The ready answer to the doctrine of representation of interests is, that
representation of separate and sinister interests we do not want. The
only interest which we wish to be consulted is the general interest, and
that, therefore, is the only one which we desire to see represented. How
this, in the actual circumstances of a country, can best be
accomplished, is the only question; and it must be decided by the
considerations already adduced.

What, in contradistinction to a representation of classes, every
rational person does wish to see exemplified in Parliament, is not the
interests, but the peculiar position, and opportunities of knowledge, of
all the classes whom the theory enumerates, and many more; not in order
that partial interests may, but in order that they may not, be
consulted. The first desideratum is, to place every member of the
legislature under the most complete responsibility to the community at
large, which the state of civilization of the community renders
consistent with other necessary ends. The second is, to compose the
legislature, in as large a proportion as possible, of persons so highly
cultivated, intellectually and morally, as to be free from narrow or
partial views, and from any peculiar bias. But as such persons are
rarely to be found in sufficient numbers, it is doubtless desirable that
the remainder of the body should be of as miscellaneous a composition as
possible (consistently with accountability to the people), in order that
the twist of one person may be neutralized by the contrary twist of
another; and if the individuals must be biassed, the evil be at least
avoided of having them all biassed one way. An indistinct perception of
this truth, is what gives all its plausibility to the doctrine of
class-representation. But the principle thus stated, needs Edition:
current; Page: [46] no especial provision to be made for it in a scheme
of representation. The diversity of local circumstances, and the varying
spirit of local constituencies, provide for it sufficiently.

Recommending this important subject to the consideration of our author
in his next edition, we take leave of him; cordially wishing that his
country may be enriched with many similar productions from his pen, and
regretting that he has not yet obtained the opportunity he sought, of
proclaiming in the House of Commons the great principles which this work
will contribute so largely to diffuse. That he failed to obtain that
opportunity is anything but creditable, all circumstances considered, to
the electors of the great and important town for which he offered
himself as a candidate. We trust that, ere long, some liberal
constituency will claim for itself the honour which his own townsmen
knew not how to appreciate.

Edition: current; Page: [47]


DE TOCQUEVILLE ON DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA [I]
 1835

Edition: current; Page: [48]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London Review, I (Oct., 1835), 85-129 (equivalent to Westminster Review,
XXX). Headed: “Art. IV. / De Tocqueville on Democracy in America. / 1.
De la Démocratie en Amérique. Par Alexis de Tocqueville, / Avocat à la
Cour Royal de Paris; l’un des auteurs du livre / intitulé Du Systême
Pénitentiaire aux Etats-Unis. Orné / d’une Carte d’Amérique. [Paris:
Gosselin,] 1835, 8vo. 2 vols. 2nd edition. / 2. Democracy in America. By
Alexis de Tocqueville, Avocat / à la Cour Royale de Paris, &c. &c.
Translated by Henry / Reeve, Esq. In 2 vols. Vol. I. [London:] Saunders
and Otley, 1835.” Signed “A.” Running title: “De Tocqueville on
Democracy in America.” Republished in part as second portion of
“Appendix,” Dissertations and Discussions, I, 470-4, and in part in “De
Tocqueville on Democracy in America [II],” ibid., II, 34-5 (see 650-3
and 174-5 below). Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A review of De
Tocqueville’s ‘Democracy in America’ in the third number of the London
Review (October 1835.)” (MacMinn, 45.) The copy of the article in the
Somerville College Library has no corrections or emendations. Also in
Somerville, without corrections or emendations, is a sewn, uncut
offprint, paged 1-45, signed “A.”

For a discussion of the composition of this article, and JSM’s relations
with Tocqueville, see the Textual Introduction, lxxii-lxxiv above.

The republication of part of the review (71-74n) as the concluding
portion of “Appendix,” D&D, I, 470-4, led to some rewriting, as did the
incorporation of parts of the review (see 78-9) in the final version of
“De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [II]” in D&D, II, In the variant
notes, “59” indicates D&D, I, 1st ed., 1859; “67” indicates D&D, 2nd
ed., 1867.

References to both the original and to the Reeve translation are given
for quotations from Vol. I of Tocqueville; for those from Vol. II, there
are references only to the original, as evidently the second volume of
Reeve was not available to JSM at the time.

Edition: current; Page: [49]


De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [I]

“amongst the novel objects,” says M. de Tocqueville* in the opening of
his work,

that attracted my attention during my stay in the United States, nothing
struck me more forcibly than the general equality of conditions. I
readily discovered the prodigious influence which this primary fact
exercises on the whole course of society: it gives a certain direction
to public opinion, and a certain character to the laws; it imparts new
maxims to the governing powers, and peculiar habits to the governed. I
speedily perceived that the influence of this fact extends far beyond
the political character and the laws of the country, and that it has no
less empire over private society than over the government: it creates
opinions, engenders sentiments, suggests the ordinary practices of life,
and modifies whatever it does not produce.

The more I advanced in the study of American society the more I
perceived that the equality of conditions was the fundamental fact from
which all others seemed to be derived, and the central point at which
all my observations constantly terminated. I then turned my thoughts to
our own hemisphere, and imagined that I discerned there also something
analogous to the spectacle which the New World presented to me. I
observed that the equality of conditions, though it has not yet reached,
as in the United States, its extreme limits, is daily progressing
towards them; and that the democracy which governs the American
communities appears to be rapidly rising into power in Europe. From that
moment I conceived the idea of the book which is now before the
reader.[*]

To depict accurately, and to estimate justly, the institutions of the
United States, have been therefore but secondary aims with the original
and profound author of these volumes—secondary, we mean, in themselves,
but indispensable to his main object. This object was, to inquire, what
light is thrown, by the example of America, upon the question of
democracy; which he considers as the great and paramount question of our
age.

In turning to America for materials with which to discuss that question,
M. de Tocqueville, it needs hardly be remarked, is not singular. All who
write Edition: current; Page: [50] or speak on either side of the
dispute, are prompt enough in pressing America into their service: but
it is for purposes, in general, quite different from that of M. de
Tocqueville.

America is usually cited by the two great parties which divide Europe,
as an argument for or against democracy. Democrats have sought to prove
by it that we ought to be democrats; aristocrats, that we should cleave
to aristocracy, and withstand the democratic spirit.

It is not towards deciding this question, that M. de Tocqueville has
sought to contribute, by laying before the European world the results of
his study of America. He considers it as already irrevocably decided.

The crowd of English politicians, whether public men or public writers,
who live in a truly insular ignorance of the great movement of European
ideas, will be astonished to find, that a conclusion which but few among
them, in their most far-reaching speculations, have yet arrived at, is
the point from which the foremost continental thinkers begin theirs; and
that a philosopher, whose impartiality as between aristocracy and
democracy is unparalleled in our time, considers it an established
truth, on the proof of which it is no longer necessary to insist, that
the progress of democracy neither can nor ought to be stopped. Not to
determine whether democracy shall come, but how to make the best of it
when it does come, is the scope of M. de Tocqueville’s speculations.

That comprehensive survey of the series of changes composing the history
of our race, which is now familiar to every continental writer with any
pretensions to philosophy, has taught to M. de Tocqueville, that the
movement towards democracy dates from the dawn of modern civilization,
and has continued steadily advancing from that time. Eight centuries
ago, society was divided into barons and serfs: the barons being
everything, the serfs nothing. At every succeeding epoch this inequality
of condition is found to have somewhat abated; every century has done
something considerable towards lowering the powerful and raising the
low. Every step in civilization—every victory of intellect—every
advancement in wealth—has multiplied the resources of the many; while
the same causes, by their indirect agency, have frittered away the
strength and relaxed the energy of the few. We now find ourselves in a
condition of society which, compared with that whence we have emerged,
might be termed equality; yet not only are the same levelling influences
still at work, but their force is vastly augmented by new elements which
the world never before saw. For the first time, the power and the habit
of reading begins to permeate the hitherto inert mass. Reading is power:
not only because it is knowledge, but still more because it is a means
of communication—because, by the aid of it, not only do opinions and
feelings spread to the multitude, but every individual who holds them
knows that they are held by the multitude; which of itself suffices, if
they continue to be Edition: current; Page: [51] held, to ensure their
speedy predominance. The many, for the first time, have now learned the
lesson, which, once learned, is never forgotten—that their strength,
when they choose to exert it, is invincible. And, for the first time,
they have learned to unite for their own objects, without waiting for
any section of the aristocracy to place itself at their head. The
capacity of cooperation for a common purpose, heretofore a monopolized
instrument of power in the hands of the higher classes, is now a most
formidable one in those of the lowest. Under these influences it is not
surprising that society makes greater strides in ten years, towards the
levelling of inequalities, than lately in a century, or formerly in
three or four.

M. de Tocqueville is unable to imagine that a progress, which has
continued with uninterrupted steadiness for so many centuries, can be
stayed now. He assumes that it will continue, until all artificial
inequalities shall have disappeared from among mankind; those
inequalities only remaining which are the natural and inevitable effects
of the protection of property. This appears to him a tremendous fact,
pregnant with every conceivable possibility of evil, but also with
immense possibilities of good: leaving, in fact, only the alternative of
democracy or despotism; and unless the one be practicable, the other, he
is deliberately convinced, will be our lot.

The contemplation of the entirely new position into which mankind are
entering, and of their supine insensibility to the new exigencies of
that new position, fills our author with solemn and anxious emotions. We
invite the attention of English readers to a long and deeply interesting
passage from his introductory chapter, as a specimen of a mode of
thinking concerning the great changes now in progress, which will be new
to many of them:

The Christian nations of our age seem to me to present a fearful
spectacle; the impulse which is bearing them forward is so strong that
it cannot be stopped, but it is not yet so rapid that it cannot be
guided: their fate is in their own hands; yet a little while, and it may
be so no longer.

The first duty which is at this time imposed upon those who direct our
affairs is to educate the democracy; to reanimate its faith, if that be
possible; to purify its morals; to regulate its energies; to substitute
for its inexperience a knowledge of business, and for its blind
instincts an acquaintance with its true interests; to adapt its
government to time and place, and to modify it in compliance with
circumstances and characters.

A new science of politics is indispensable to a world which has become
new. This, however, is what we think of least, launched in the middle of
a rapid stream, we obstinately fix our eyes on the ruins which may still
be descried upon the shore we have left, whilst the current sweeps us
along, and drives us toward an unseen abyss.

In no country in Europe has the great social revolution which I have
been describing made such rapid progress as in France; but it has always
been borne on by chance. The heads of the State have never thought of
making any preparation for it, and its victories have been obtained in
spite of their resistance, or without their knowledge. The most
powerful, the most intelligent, and the most Edition: current; Page:
[52] moral classes of the nation have never attempted to connect
themselves with it in order to guide it. Democracy has consequently been
abandoned to its untutored instincts, and it has grown up like those
outcasts who receive their education in the public streets, and who are
unacquainted with aught of society but its vices and its miseries. The
existence of a democracy was seemingly unknown, when on a sudden it took
possession of the supreme power. Everything then servilely submitted to
its smallest wish; it was worshipped as the idol of strength; until,
when it was enfeebled by its own excesses, the legislator conceived the
rash project of annihilating it, instead of instructing it and
correcting its bad tendencies. No attempt was made to fit it to govern;
the sole thought was of excluding it from the government.

The consequence of this has been, that the democratic revolution has
been effected only in the material parts of society, without that
concomitant change in laws, ideas, habits, and manners which was
necessary to render such a revolution beneficial. We have gotten a
democracy, severed from whatever would lessen its vices and render its
natural advantages more prominent; and although we already perceive the
evils it brings, we are yet ignorant of the benefits it might confer.

(Reeve, Vol. I, pp. xxii-xxiv; Tocqueville, Vol. I, pp. 10-12.)

M. de Tocqueville then rises into the following powerful delineation of
the state of society which has passed never to return, and of the
happier, though, in his opinion, less brilliant state, to which we ought
now to aspire: of the good which democracy takes away, and of that
which, if its natural capabilities are improved, it may bring.

While the power of the Crown, supported by the aristocracy, peaceably
governed the nations of Europe, society possessed, in the midst of its
wretchedness, several advantages which cannot easily be appreciated or
conceived in our times.

The power of a part of his subjects set insurmountable barriers to the
tyranny of the prince; and the monarch, who felt the almost divine
character which he enjoyed in the eyes of the multitude, derived from
the respect which he inspired, a motive for the just use of his power.

Although lifted so high above the people, the nobles, nevertheless, took
that calm and kindly interest in its fate which the shepherd feels
towards his flock; and without acknowledging the poor man as their
equal, they watched over his destiny as a trust which Providence had
confided to their care.

The people, never having conceived the idea of a state of society
different from their own, and entertaining no expectation of ever
becoming the rivals of their chiefs, accepted their benefits without
discussing their rights. They felt attached to them when they were
clement and just, and submitted without resistance or servility to their
oppressions, as to inevitable visitations of the arm of God. Usages and
manners had, moreover, created a species of law in the midst of
violence, and established certain limits to oppression.

As the noble never suspected that any one would attempt to deprive him
of privileges which he believed to be legitimate, and as the serf looked
upon his own inferiority as a consequence of the immutable order of
nature, it is easy to imagine that a sort of mutual good-will might
arise between two classes so differently favoured by fate. Inequality
and wretchedness were then to be found in society; but the souls of
neither rank of men were degraded.

It is not by the exercise of power or by the habit of obedience that men
are Edition: current; Page: [53] debased; it is by the exercise of a
power which they believe to be illegitimate, and by obedience to a rule
which they consider to be usurped and unjust.

On one side were wealth, strength, and leisure, accompanied by the
refinements of luxury, the elegances of taste, the pleasures of
intellect, and the culture of art. On the other were labour, rudeness,
and ignorance; but in the midst of this coarse and ignorant multitude,
it was not uncommon to meet with energetic passions, generous
sentiments, profound religious convictions, and wild virtues. Society
thus organized might possess stability, power, and, above all, glory.

But the scene is now changed, and gradually the two ranks mingle; the
barriers which once severed mankind are lowered; properties are broken
down, power is subdivided, the light of intelligence spreads, and the
capacities of all classes are more equally cultivated; the state of
society becomes democratic, and the empire of democracy is slowly and
peaceably introduced into institutions and manners.

I can now conceive a society in which all, regarding the law as
emanating from themselves, would give it their attachment and their
ready submission; in which the authority of the State would be respected
as necessary, though not as divine; and the loyalty of the subject to
the chief magistrate would not be a passion, but a quiet and rational
persuasion. Every individual being in the possession of rights, and
feeling secure of retaining them, a kind of manly reliance and
reciprocal courtesy would arise between all classes, alike removed from
pride and meanness.

The people, well acquainted with their true interests, would allow,
that, in order to profit by the advantages of society, it is necessary
to submit to its burthens. In this state of things, the voluntary
association of the citizens might supply the place of the individual
power of the nobles, and the community would be alike protected from
anarchy and from oppression.

I admit that, in a democratic state thus constituted, society will not
be stationary; but the impulses of the social body may be duly
regulated, and directed towards improvement. If there be less splendour
than in the halls of an aristocracy, the contrast of misery will be less
frequent also, enjoyments may be less intense, but comfort will be more
general; the sciences may be less highly cultivated, but ignorance will
be less common; the impetuosity of the feelings will be repressed, and
the habits of the nation softened, there will be more vices, and fewer
crimes.

In the absence of enthusiasm and of an ardent faith, great sacrifices
may be obtained from the members of such a commonwealth by an appeal to
their understandings and their experience. Each individual, being
equally weak will feel an equal necessity for uniting with his
fellow-citizens; and as he knows that he can obtain their good offices
only by giving his, he will readily perceive that his personal interest
is identified with the interest of the community.

The nation, taken as a whole, will be less brilliant, less glorious, and
perhaps less powerful; but the majority of the citizens will enjoy a
greater degree of prosperity, and the people will remain quiet, not
because they despair of being better, but because they know that they
are well.

If all the consequences of this state of things were not good or useful,
society would at least have appropriated all such of them as were so;
and having once and for ever renounced the social advantages of
aristocracy, mankind would enter into possession of all the benefits
which democracy can afford.

(Reeve. Vol. I, pp. xxiv-xxviii; Tocqueville, Vol. I, pp. 12-15.)

In the picture which follows, the author has had chiefly in view the
state of France; and much of it would be grossly exaggerated as a
description of Edition: current; Page: [54] England: but we may receive
it as a warning of what we may in time expect, if our influential
classes continue to forego the exercise of the faculty which
distinguishes rational creatures from brutes, and either blindly resist
the course of events, or allow them to rush on wildly without any aid
from human foresight:

But we—what have we adopted in the place of those institutions, those
ideas, and those customs of our forefathers which we have abandoned? The
spell of royalty is broken, but it has not been succeeded by the majesty
of the laws; the people have learned to despise all authority, but fear
now extorts a larger tribute of obedience than that which was formerly
paid by reverence and by love.

I perceive that we have destroyed those independent existences which
were able to cope with tyranny single-handed: but the government has
alone inherited the privileges of which families, corporations, and
individuals have been deprived: to the strength, sometimes oppressive,
but often conservative, of a few, has succeeded the weakness of all.

The division of property has lessened the distance which separated the
rich from the poor; but the nearer they draw to each other, the greater
seems their mutual hatred, and the more vehement the envy and the dread
with which they resist each other’s claims to power, the notion of right
is alike a stranger to both classes, and force is, in the eyes of both,
the only argument for the present, and the only resource for the future.

The poor man retains the prejudices of his forefathers without their
faith, and their ignorance without their virtues, he has adopted the
doctrine of self-interest as the rule of his actions, without having
acquired the knowledge which enlightens it, and his selfishness is no
less blind than his devotedness was formerly.

If society is tranquil, it is not because it is conscious of its
strength and of its well-being, but, on the contrary, because it
believes itself weak and infirm, and fears that a single effort may cost
it its life. Everybody feels the evil, but no one has courage or energy
enough to seek the cure; the desires, the regrets, the sorrows, and the
joys of the time produce no visible or permanent fruits.

We have, then, abandoned whatever advantages the old state of things
afforded, without receiving the compensations naturally belonging to our
present condition; we have destroyed an aristocratic society, and we
seem inclined to survey its ruins with complacency, and to fix our abode
in the midst of them.

(Reeve. Vol. I, pp. xxviii-xxx; Tocqueville, Vol. I, pp. 15-17.)

In quoting so much of this striking passage, we would not be understood
as adopting the whole and every part of it, as the expression of our own
sentiments. The good which mankind have lost, is coloured, we think,
rather too highly, and the evils of the present state of transition too
darkly; and we think, also, that more than our author seems to believe,
of what was good in the influences of aristocracy, is compatible, if we
really wish to find it so, with a well-regulated democracy. But though
we would soften the colours of the picture, we would not alter them; M.
de Tocqueville’s is, in our eyes, the true view of the position in which
mankind now stand: and on the timely recognition of it as such, by the
influential classes of our own and other countries, we believe the most
important interests of our race to be greatly dependent.

Edition: current; Page: [55]
It is under the influence of such views that M. de Tocqueville has
examined the state of society in America.

There is a country, says he, where the great change, progressively
taking place throughout the civilized world, is consummated. In the
United States, democracy reigns with undisputed empire; and equality of
condition among mankind has reached what seems its ultimate limit.* The
place in which to Edition: current; Page: [56] study democracy, must be
that where its natural tendencies have the freest scope; where all its
peculiarities are most fully developed and most visible. In America,
therefore, if anywhere, we may expect to learn—first, what portion of
human well-being is compatible with democracy in any form; and, next,
what are the good and what the bad properties of democracy, and by what
means the former may be strengthened, the latter controlled. We have it
not in our power to choose between democracy and aristocracy; necessity
and Providence have decided that for us. But the choice we are still
called upon to make is between a well and an ill-regulated democracy;
and on that depends the future well-being of the human race.

When M. de Tocqueville says, that he studied America, not in order to
disparage or to vindicate democracy, but in order to understand it, he
makes no false claim to impartiality. Not a trace of a prejudice, or so
much as a previous leaning either to the side of democracy or
aristocracy, shows itself in his work. He is indeed anything but
indifferent to the ends, to which all forms of government profess to be
means. He manifests the deepest and steadiest concern for all the great
interests, material and spiritual, of the human race. But between
aristocracy and democracy he holds the balance straight, with all the
impassibility of a mere scientific observer. He was indeed most
favourably placed for looking upon both sides of that great contest with
an unbiassed judgment; for the impressions of his early education were
royalist, while among the influences of society and the age liberalism
is predominant. He has renounced the impressions of his youth, but he
looks back to them with no aversion. It is indifferent to him what value
we set upon the good or evil of aristocracy, since that in his view is
past and gone. The good and evil of democracy, be they what they may,
are what we must now look to; and for us the questions are, how to make
the best of democracy, and what that best amounts to.

We have stated the purposes of M. de Tocqueville’s examination of
America. We have now to add its result.

The conclusion at which he has arrived is, that this irresistible
current, which cannot be stemmed, may be guided, and guided to a happy
termination. Edition: current; Page: [57] The bad tendencies of
democracy, in his opinion, admit of being mitigated; its good tendencies
of being so strengthened as to be more than a compensation for the bad.
It is his belief that a government, substantially a democracy, but
constructed with the necessary precautions, may subsist in Europe, may
be stable and durable, and may secure to the aggregate of the human
beings living under it, a greater sum of happiness than has ever yet
been enjoyed by any people. The universal aim, therefore, should be, so
to prepare the way for democracy, that when it comes, it may come in
this beneficial shape; not only for the sake of the good we have to
expect from it, but because it is literally our only refuge from a
despotism resembling not the tempered and regulated absolutism of modern
times, but the tyranny of the Cæsars. For when the equality of
conditions shall have reached the point which in America it has already
attained, and there shall be no power intermediate between the monarch
and the multitude; when there remains no individual and no class capable
of separately offering any serious obstacle to the will of the
government; then, unless the people are fit to rule, the monarch will be
as perfectly autocratic as amidst the equality of an Asiatic despotism.
Where all are equal, all must be alike free, or alike slaves.

The book, of which we have now described the plan and purpose, has been
executed in a manner worthy of so noble a scheme. It has at once taken
its rank among the most remarkable productions of our time; and is a
book with which, both for its facts and its speculations, all who would
understand, or who are called upon to exercise influence over their age,
are bound to be familiar. It will contribute to give to the political
speculations of our time a new character. Hitherto, aristocracy and
democracy have been looked at chiefly in the mass, and applauded as
good, or censured as bad, on the whole. But the time is now come for a
narrower inspection, and a more discriminating judgment. M. de
Tocqueville, among the first, has set the example of analysing
democracy; of distinguishing one of its features, one of its tendencies,
from another; of showing which of these tendencies is good, and which
bad, in itself; how far each is necessarily connected with the rest, and
to what extent any of them may be counteracted or modified, either by
accident or foresight. He does this, with so noble a field as a great
nation to demonstrate upon; which field he has commenced by minutely
examining; selecting, with a discernment of which we have had no
previous example, the material facts, and surveying these by the light
of principles, drawn from no ordinary knowledge of human nature. We do
not think his conclusions always just, but we think them always entitled
to the most respectful attention, and never destitute of at least a
large foundation of truth. The author’s mind, except that it is of a
soberer character, seems to us to resemble Montesquieu most among the
great French writers. The book is such as Montesquieu might have
written, if to his genius he had superadded good sense, and the lights
Edition: current; Page: [58] which mankind have since gained from the
experiences of a period in which they may be said to have lived
centuries in fifty years.

We feel how impossible it is, in the space of an article, to exemplify
all the features of a work, every page of which has nearly as great a
claim to citation as any other. For M. de Tocqueville’s ideas do not
float thinly upon a sea of words; none of his propositions are
unmeaning, none of his meanings superfluous; not a paragraph could have
been omitted without diminishing the value of the work. We must
endeavour to make a selection.

The first volume, the only one of which a translation has yet appeared,
describes chiefly the institutions of the United States: the second, the
state of society, which he represents to be the fruit of those
institutions. We should have been glad to assume that the reader
possessed a general acquaintance with the subject of the former volume,
and to refer him, for details, to the work itself. But it so happens
that in no one point has M. de Tocqueville rendered a greater service to
the European public, than by actually giving them their first
information of the very existence of some of the most important parts of
the American constitution. We allude particularly to the municipal
institutions; which, as our author shows, and as might have been
expected, are the very fountain-head of American democracy, and one
principal cause of all that is valuable in its influences; but of which
English travellers, a race who have eyes and see not, ears and hear
not,[*] have not so much as perceived the existence.

In the New England States, the part of the Union in which the municipal
system which generally prevails through the whole, has been brought to
the greatest perfection, the following are its leading principles. The
country is parcelled out into districts called townships, containing, on
an average, from two to three thousand inhabitants. Each township
manages its local concerns within itself; judicial business excepted,
which, more wisely than their English brethren, the Americans appear to
keep separate from all other functions. The remaining part—that is, the
administrative part of the local business—is not only under the complete
control of the people—but the people themselves, convened in general
assembly, vote all local taxes, and decide on all new and important
undertakings. While the deliberative part of the administration is thus
conducted directly by the people, the executive part is in the hands of
a variety of officers, annually elected by the people, and mostly paid.
The following details will be read with interest:

In New England the majority acts by representatives in the conduct of
the public business of the state; but if such an arrangement be
necessary in general affairs—in the townships, where the legislative and
administrative action of the Edition: current; Page: [59] government is
in more immediate contact with the governed, the system of
representation is not adopted. There is no town-council; the body of
electors, after having appointed its magistrates, directs them in
everything that exceeds the mere execution of the laws.

This state of things is so contrary to our ideas, and so opposed to our
habits, that it is necessary for me to adduce some examples to explain
it thoroughly.

The public functions in the township are extremely numerous, and
minutely divided, as we shall see further on; but the larger portion of
the business of administration is vested in the hands of a small number
of individuals, called the selectmen.

The general laws of the state impose a certain number of obligations on
the selectmen, which they may fulfil without the authorization of the
body they represent, and which if they neglect they are personally
responsible. The law of the state obliges them, for instance, to draw up
the list of electors in their townships; and if they omit this part of
their functions, they are guilty of a misdemeanor. In all the affairs,
however, which are left to be determined by the local authorities, the
selectmen are the organs of the popular mandate, as in France the Maire
executes the decree of the municipal council. They usually act upon
their own responsibility, and merely put in practice principles which
have been previously recognised by the majority. But if any change is to
be introduced in the existing state of things, or if they wish to
undertake any new enterprise, they are obliged to refer to the source of
their power. If, for instance, a school is to be established, the
selectmen convoke the whole body of electors on a certain day at an
appointed place; they state the exigency of the case, they give their
opinion on the means of satisfying it, on the probable expense, and the
site which seems to be most favourable. The meeting is consulted on
these several points; it adopts the principle, determines the site,
votes the rate, and leaves the execution of its resolution to the
selectmen.

The selectmen have alone the right of summoning a town-meeting; but they
may be called upon to do so if ten landed proprietors are desirous of
submitting a new project to the assent of the township, they may demand
a general convocation of the inhabitants; the selectmen are obliged to
comply, and retain only the right of presiding at the meeting.

The selectmen are elected every year, in the month of April or of May.
The town-meeting chooses at the same time a number of other municipal
officers, who are intrusted with important administrative functions. The
assessors rate the township; the collectors receive the rate. A
constable is appointed to keep the peace, to watch the streets, and to
lend his personal aid to the execution of the laws, the town-clerk
records the proceedings of the town-meetings, and keeps the register of
births, deaths, and marriages, the treasurer keeps the funds; the
overseer of the poor performs the difficult task of superintending the
administration of the poor-laws; committee-men are appointed for the
superintendence of the schools and public instruction; and the
inspectors of roads, who take care of the greater and lesser
thoroughfares of the township, complete the list of the principal
functionaries. There are, however, still further subdivisions: amongst
the municipal officers are to be found parish commissioners, who audit
the expenses of public worship, different classes of inspectors, some of
whom are to direct the efforts of the citizens in case of fire,
tithing-men, listers, haywards, chimney-viewers, fence-viewers to
maintain the bounds of property, timber-measurers, and inspectors of
weights and measures.

Edition: current; Page: [60]
There are nineteen principal offices in a township. Every inhabitant is
constrained, under a pecuniary penalty, to undertake these different
functions; which, however, are almost all paid, in order that the poorer
citizens may be able to give up their time without loss. In general the
American system is not to grant a fixed salary to public functionaries.
Every service has its price, and they are remunerated in proportion to
what they have done.

(Reeve, Vol. I, pp. 75-8; Tocqueville, Vol. I, pp. 99-103.)

In this system of municipal self-government, coeval with the first
settlement of the American colonies—a system which the herd of English
travellers either have not observed, or have not thought worth
mentioning, classing it doubtless in point of importance with their own
parish affairs at home—our author beholds the principal instrument of
that political education of the people, which alone enables a popular
government to maintain itself, or renders it desirable that it should.
It is a fundamental principle in his political philosophy, as it has
long been in ours, that only by the habit of superintending their local
interests can that diffusion of intelligence and mental activity, as
applied to their joint concerns, take place among the mass of a people,
which can qualify them to superintend with steadiness or consistency the
proceedings of their government, or to exercise any power in national
affairs except by fits, and as tools in the hands of others.

“The commune,” says M. de Tocqueville (we borrow the French word,
because there is no English word which expresses the unit of the body
politic, whether that unit be a town or a village)—

The commune is the only association which has so completely its
foundation in nature, that wherever a number of human beings are
collected, a commune arises of itself.

The commune, therefore, must necessarily exist in all nations, whatever
may be their laws and customs; monarchies and republics are creations of
man, the commune seems to issue directly from the hands of God. But
although the existence of the commune is coeval with that of man
communal freedom is rare, and difficult to be maintained. A nation is
always able to establish great political assemblies, because it is sure
to contain a certain number of persons whose intellectual cultivation
stands them to a certain extent instead of practical experience. But the
commune is composed of rude materials, which are often not to be
fashioned by the legislator. The difficulty of introducing municipal
freedom is apt to increase, instead of diminishing, with the increased
enlightenment of the people. A highly civilized community can ill brook
the first rude attempts of village independence; is disgusted at the
multitude of blunders; and is apt to despair of success before the
experiment is completed.

Again, no immunities are so ill protected against the encroachments of
the supreme power, as those of municipal bodies. Left to themselves,
these local liberties are ill able to maintain themselves against a
strong or an enterprising government: to resist successfully, they must
have attained their fullest development, and have become identified with
the habits and ways of thinking of the Edition: current; Page: [61]
people. Thus, until municipal freedom is amalgamated with the manners of
a people, it is easily destroyed, and only after a long existence in the
laws can it be thus amalgamated.

Municipal freedom, therefore, is not, if I may so express myself, the
fruit of human device. Accordingly it is rarely created, but is, as it
were, of spontaneous growth, developed almost in secret, in the midst of
a semi-barbarous state of society. The long-continued action of laws and
of manners, favourable circumstances, and, above all, time, can alone
consolidate it. Of all the nations of the continent of Europe, we may
affirm that there is not one which has any knowledge of it.

Nevertheless, it is in the commune that the strength of a free people
resides. Municipal institutions are to liberty what primary schools are
to knowledge; they bring it within the reach of the people, give them a
taste for its peaceable exercise, and practice in its use. Without
municipal institutions, a nation may give itself a free government, but
it has not the spirit of freedom. Transient passions, momentary
interests, or the chance of circumstances, may give it the outward forms
of independence; but the despotic principle, which has been driven back
into the interior of the body politic, will sooner or later re-appear at
the surface.*

Nor is the salutary influence of this invaluable part of the American
constitution seen only in creating, but at least equally so in
regulating, the spirit of interference in public affairs. This effect,
together with the influence of the same cause in generating patriotism
and public spirit, are instructively delineated in the following
passage:

The township of New England possesses two advantages which infallibly
secure the attentive interest of mankind, namely, independence and
power. Its sphere is indeed small and limited, but within that sphere
its action is unrestrained: and its independence gives to it a real
importance which its extent and population would not always insure.

It is to be remembered that the affections of men seldom attach
themselves but where there is power. Patriotism is not durable in a
conquered nation. The New Englander is attached to his township, not so
much because he was born in it, as because it constitutes a free and
powerful corporation, of which he is a member, and of which to influence
the government is an object worth exerting himself for.

In Europe the absence of local public spirit is a frequent subject of
regret even to governments themselves, for every one agrees that there
is no surer guarantee of order and tranquillity, but nobody knows how to
create it. They fear that if the localities were made powerful and
independent, the authorities of the nation might be disunited, and the
state exposed to anarchy. Yet, deprive the locality of power and
independence, it may contain subjects, but it will have no citizens.

Another important fact is, that the township of New England is so
constituted as to excite the warmest of human affections, without
arousing strongly the ambitious passions of the heart of man. The
officers of the county are not elective, Edition: current; Page: [62]
and their authority is very limited. Even the state is only a
second-rate community, whose tranquil and obscure administration offers
no inducement to most men, sufficient to draw them away from the centre
of their private interests into the turmoil of public affairs. The
federal government confers power and honour on the men who conduct it;
but these can never be very numerous. The high station of the Presidency
can only be reached at an advanced period of life; and the other federal
offices of a high order are generally attained, as it were accidentally,
by persons who have already distinguished themselves in some other
career. Their attainment cannot be the permanent aim of an ambitious
life. In the township, therefore, in the centre of the ordinary
relations of life, become concentrated the desire of public esteem, the
thirst for the exercise of influence, and the taste for authority and
popularity; and the passions which commonly embroil society, change
their character when they find a vent so near the domestic hearth and
the family circle.

In the American States power has been disseminated with admirable skill,
for the purpose of interesting the greatest possible number of persons
in the common weal. Independently of the electors, who are from time to
time called to take a direct share in the government, there are
innumerable functionaries who all, in their several spheres, represent
the same powerful whole in whose name they act. The local administration
thus affords an unfailing source of profit and interest to a vast number
of individuals.

The American system, while it divides the local authority among so many
citizens, does not scruple to multiply the obligations imposed by the
township upon its members. For in the United States it is believed, and
with truth, that patriotism is a kind of devotion which is strengthened
by ritual observance.

In this manner, every person is continually reminded that he belongs to
the community; his connexion with it is daily manifested in the
fulfilment of a duty, or the exercise of a right; and a constant though
gentle motion is thus kept up in society, which animates without
disturbing it.

The American attaches himself to the state for the same reason which
makes the mountaineer cling to his hills; because he finds in his
country more marked features, a more decided physiognomy than elsewhere.

The existence of the townships of New England is in general a happy one.
Their government is suited to their tastes and chosen by themselves. In
the midst of the profound peace and general comfort which reign in
America, the commotions of municipal discord are unfrequent. The conduct
of local business is easy. Besides, the political education of the
people has long been complete; say rather that it was complete when the
people first set foot upon the soil. In New England the distinction of
ranks does not exist even in memory, no portion of the community,
therefore, is tempted to oppress the remainder, and acts of injustice
which injure isolated individuals, are forgotten in the general
contentment which prevails. If the government is defective, (and it
would no doubt be easy to point out its deficiencies,) yet so long as it
contrives to go on, the fact that it really emanates from those it
governs, casts the protecting spell of a parental pride over its faults.
Besides, they have nothing to compare it with. England formerly ruled
over the aggregation of the colonies, but the people always managed
their own local affairs. The sovereignty of the people is, in the
commune, not only an ancient but a primitive state.

The native of New England is attached to his township, because it is
independent and powerful, he feels interested in it, because he takes
part in its management: Edition: current; Page: [63] the prosperity he
enjoys in it makes it an object of his attention: he centres in it his
ambition and his hopes. He takes a part in every occurrence in the
place; he practises the art of government in the small sphere within his
reach; he accustoms himself to those forms, without which liberty can
only take the shape of revolution; he imbibes their spirit; he acquires
a taste for order, comprehends the mutual play of concurrent
authorities, and collects clear practical notions on the nature of his
duties and the extent of his rights.

(Reeve, Vol. I, pp. 82-6; Tocqueville, Vol. I, pp. 107-11.)

These considerations are of the highest importance. It is not without
reason that M. de Tocqueville considers local democracy to be the school
as well as the safety-valve of democracy in the state,—the means of
training the people to the good use of that power, which, whether
prepared for it or not, they will assuredly in a short time be in the
full exercise of. There has been much said of late—and truly not a word
too much—on the necessity, now that the people are acquiring power, of
giving them education, meaning school instruction, to qualify them for
its exercise. The importance of school instruction is doubtless great;
but it should also be recollected, that what really constitutes
education is the formation of habits; and as we do not learn to read or
write, to ride or swim, by being merely told how to do it, but by doing
it, so it is only by practising popular government on a limited scale,
that the people will ever learn how to exercise it on a larger.

M. de Tocqueville does not pretend, nor do we, that local
self-government should be introduced into Europe in the exact shape in
which it exists in New England. An assembly of the rateable inhabitants
of a district, to discuss and vote a rate, would usually be attended
only by those who had some private interest to serve, and would in
general, as is proved by the experience of open vestries, only throw the
cloak of democratic forms over a jobbing oligarchy. In a country like
America, of high wages and high profits, every citizen can afford to
attend to public affairs, as if they were his own; but in England it
would be useless calling upon the people themselves to bestow habitually
any larger share of attention on municipal management than is implied in
the periodical election of a representative body. This privilege has
recently been conferred, though in an imperfect shape, upon the
inhabitants of all our considerable towns; but the rural districts,
where the people are so much more backward, and the system of training
so forcibly described by M. de Tocqueville is proportionally more
needed,—the rural districts are not yet empowered to elect officers for
keeping their own jails and highways in repair: that is still left where
the feudal system left it, in the hands of the great proprietors; the
tenants at will, so dear to aristocracy, being thought qualified to take
a share in no elections save those of the great council of the nation.
But some of the greatest political benefits ever acquired by mankind
have been the accidental result of arrangements devised for Edition:
current; Page: [64] quite different ends; and thus, in the unions of
parishes formed under the new poor law,[*] and the boards of guardians
chosen by popular election to superintend the management of those
unions, we see the commencement of an application of the principle of
popular representation, for municipal purposes, to extensive rural
districts, and the creation of a machinery which, if found to work well,
may easily be extended to all other business for which local
representative bodies are requisite.

M. de Tocqueville, though he is not sparing in pointing out the faults
of the institutions of the United States, regards those institutions on
the whole with no inconsiderable admiration. The federal constitution,
in particular, (as distinguished from the various state constitutions,)
he considers as a remarkable monument of foresight and sagacity. The
great men by whom, during two years’ deliberation, that constitution was
constructed, discerned, according to him, with great wisdom, the
vulnerable points both of democracy and of federal government, and did
nearly everything which could have been done, in their circumstances, to
strengthen the weak side of both.

Our space will not allow us to follow our author through the details of
the American institutions; but we cannot pass without particular notice
his remarks on one general principle which pervades them.

Two modes, says M. de Tocqueville, present themselves for keeping a
government under restraint: one is to diminish its power; the other, to
give power liberally, but to subdivide it among many hands.

There are two methods of diminishing the force of the government in any
country:—

The first is, to weaken the supreme power in its very principle, by
forbidding or preventing society from acting in its own defence under
certain circumstances. To weaken authority in this manner, is what is
generally termed in Europe to establish political freedom.

The second manner of diminishing the influence of the government does
not consist in stripping society of any of its rights, nor in paralysing
its efforts, but in distributing the exercise of its privileges among
various hands, and in multiplying functionaries, to each of whom all the
power is intrusted which is necessary for the performance of the task
specially imposed upon him. There may be nations whom this distribution
of social powers might lead to anarchy, but in itself it is not
anarchical. The power of government, thus divided, is indeed rendered
less irresistible and less perilous, but it is not destroyed.

The revolution of the United States was the result of a calm and
considerate love of freedom, and not of a vague and indefinite craving
for independence. It contracted no alliance with the turbulent passions
of anarchy; its course was marked, on the contrary, by an attachment to
order and legality.

It was never assumed in the United States, that the citizen of a free
country has a right to do whatever he pleases; on the contrary, social
obligations were there imposed upon him, more various than anywhere
else. No idea was entertained of calling in question or limiting the
rights or powers of society; but the Edition: current; Page: [65]
exercise of those powers was divided among many hands, to the end that
the office might be powerful and the officer insignificant, and that the
community should be at once regulated and free.

(Reeve, Vol. I, pp. 89-90; Tocqueville, Vol. I, pp. 115-16.)

The principle of sharing the powers of government among a great variety
of functionaries, and keeping these independent of one another, is the
mainspring of the American institutions. The various municipal officers
are independent of each other, and of the general government of the
state. The state governments, within their lawful sphere, are wholly
independent of the federal government, and the federal government of
them.* Each of the state governments consists of two chambers and a
governor; and the federal government consists of the House of
Representatives, the Senate, and the President of the United States. Of
each of these tripartite bodies the three branches are mutually
independent, and may, and frequently do, place themselves in direct
opposition to one another.

In what manner is harmony maintained among these jarring elements? How
is so minute a division of the governing power rendered compatible with
the existence of government? Since the concurrence of so many wills is
necessary to the working of the machine, by what means is that
concurrence obtained? The town-officers, for instance, are often the
sole agency provided for executing the laws made or orders issued by the
federal or by the state government; but those authorities can neither
dismiss them if they disobey, nor promote them to a higher post in their
department, for zealous service. How, then, is their obedience secured?

The securities are of two kinds. First, all those functionaries who are
made independent of each other within their respective spheres, depend
upon, for they are periodically elected by, a common superior—the
People. No one, therefore, likes to venture upon a collision with any
co-ordinate authority, unless he believes that, at the expiration of his
office, his conduct will be approved by his constituents.

This check, however, cannot suffice for all cases; for, in the first
place, the authorities may be accountable to different constituencies.
In a dispute, for instance, between the officers of a township and the
state government, or between the federal government and a state, the
constituents of each party may support their representatives in the
quarrel. Moreover, the check often operates too slowly, and is not of a
sufficiently energetic character for the graver delinquencies.

The remedy provided for all such cases is the interference of the courts
of justice.

Edition: current; Page: [66]
The share of the tribunals in the government of the United States is of
a most extensive and important kind. The tribunals are the supreme
arbiters between each member of the sovereignty and every other. Not
only are all executive officers amenable to them for acts done in their
public capacity, but the legislatures themselves are so. They cannot,
indeed, punish a legislature for having overstepped its authority, but
they can set aside its acts. They are avowedly empowered to refuse to
enforce any law, whether enacted by the federal or by the state
legislatures, which they consider unconstitutional.

Two questions will naturally be asked: First—does not this remarkable
provision render the constitution of the United States, what the French
constitution affects to be, unalterable? And, secondly, are not the
judges, who thus wield without responsibility the highest power in the
state, an impediment to good government, analogous and almost equal to
our House of Lords?

We answer both questions in the negative.

The constitution, though it cannot be altered by the ordinary
legislature, may be solemnly revised by an assembly summoned for the
purpose, in the forms prescribed by the constitution itself. Before such
an authority, the tribunals would of course be powerless. Their control,
in the mean time, prevents the letter and spirit of the constitution
from being infringed upon, indirectly and by stealth, by authorities not
lawfully empowered to alter it.

The other danger, that of the irresponsible power conferred upon the
judges by making them in some sort the legislators in the last resort,
is chimerical. We agree with M. de Tocqueville in thinking that the
founders of the American constitution have nowhere manifested, more than
in this provision, the practical sagacity which distinguished them. They
saw that where both the laws and the habits of the people are thoroughly
impregnated with the democratic principle, powers may safely be
intrusted to the judges, which it would be most dangerous to confide to
them in any other circumstances. A judge is one of the most deadly
instruments in the hands of a tyranny of which others are at the head;
but, while he can only exercise political influence through the indirect
medium of judicial decisions, he acts within too confined a sphere for
it to be possible for him to establish a despotism in his own favour.
The Americans saw that courts of justice, without a monarchy or an
aristocracy to back them, could never oppose any permanent obstacle to
the will of the people; and knowing that aversion to change was not
likely to be the fault of their government, they did not deem it any
serious objection to an institution, that it rendered organic changes
rather more difficult. In short, as in every government there must be
some supreme arbiter, to keep the peace among the various authorities,
and as, consistently with the spirit of the American institutions, that
supreme arbiter could not be the federal government, the founders of the
constitution deemed Edition: current; Page: [67] that this moderating
power, which must exist somewhere, was nowhere so safe as in the hands
of the courts of justice.

The Americans have retained, [says our author,] all the ordinary
characteristics of judicial authority, and have carefully restricted its
action to the ordinary circle of its functions.

The first characteristic of judicial power in all nations is, that its
function is that of an arbitrator. To warrant the interference of a
tribunal, there must be a dispute: before there can be a judgment,
somebody must bring an action. As long, therefore, as an enactment gives
rise to no lawsuit, the judicial authority is not called upon to discuss
it, and it may exist without being perceived. When a judge, in a given
case, attacks a law relating to that case, he extends the circle of his
customary duties, without however stepping beyond it; since he is in
some measure obliged to decide upon the law, in order to decide the
case. But if he pronounces upon a law without resting upon a case, he
clearly steps beyond his sphere, and invades that of the legislative
authority.

The second characteristic of judicial power is, that it pronounces upon
special cases, and not upon general principles. If a judge in deciding a
particular case destroys a general principle, by showing that every
other consequence of the principle will be annulled in a similar manner,
he remains within the ordinary limits of his functions. But if he
directly attacks a general principle, and sets it aside, without having
a particular case in view, he quits the circle in which all nations have
agreed to confine his authority, he assumes a more important, and
perhaps a more useful part than that of the magistrate, but he ceases to
be a representative of the judicial power.

The third characteristic of the judicial power is its inability to act
until it is appealed to—until a case is brought before it. This
characteristic is less universal than the other two: but notwithstanding
the exceptions. I think it may be regarded as essential. The judicial
power is in its own nature devoid of action, it cannot act without an
impulse from without. When a criminal is brought before it to be tried,
it will convict and punish him; when called upon to redress a wrong, it
is ready to redress it, when an act requires interpretation, it is
prepared to interpret it; but it does not pursue criminals hunt out
wrongs, or inquire into facts, of its own accord. A judicial functionary
who should take the initiative, and erect himself into a censor of the
laws, would in some measure do violence to this passive nature of his
authority.

The Americans have retained these three distinguishing characteristics
of the judicial power. An American judge can only pronounce a decision
when litigation has arisen: he can only pronounce upon an individual
case, and he cannot act until the cause has been duly brought before the
court.

(Reeve, Vol. I, pp. 136-8; Tocqueville, Vol. I, pp. 164-6.)

The political power which the Americans have intrusted to their courts
of justice is therefore immense, but the dangers of this power are
considerably diminished by debarring them from the use of any except
strictly judicial means. If the judge had been empowered to contest the
laws in a sweeping and general way; if he had been enabled to take the
initiative, and to pass a censure on the legislator, he would have
played a prominent part in the political sphere, and as the champion or
the antagonist of a party, he would have arrayed the hostile passions of
the nation in the conflict. But when a judge contests a law, in an
Edition: current; Page: [68] obscure proceeding, and in some particular
application, the importance of his attack is partly concealed from the
public gaze; his decision is aimed directly only at the interest of an
individual, and if the law is wounded, it is only as it were by
accident. Moreover, although it be censured it is not abolished; its
moral force may be diminished, but its cogency is by no means suspended;
and its final destruction can only be accomplished by the reiterated
attacks of the tribunals. It will, moreover, be readily understood that
by leaving it to private interests to call the veto of the tribunals
into action, and by closely uniting the attack upon the law with a suit
against an individual, the laws are protected from wanton assailants,
and from the daily aggressions of party-spirit. The errors of the
legislator are exposed only in obedience to an exigency which is
actually felt; it is always a positive and appreciable fact which serves
as the basis of a prosecution.

I am inclined to believe this practice of the American courts to be the
most favourable to liberty as well as to public order.

If the judge could only attack the legislator openly and directly, he
would sometimes be afraid to oppose any resistance to his will; and at
other moments party spirit might encourage him to brave it at every
turn. The laws would consequently be attacked when the power from which
they emanate is weak, and obeyed when it is strong. That is to say, when
it would be useful to respect them, they would be contested; and when it
would be easy to convert them into an instrument of oppression, they
would be respected. But the American judge is brought into the political
arena independently of his own will. He only judges the law because he
is obliged to judge a case. The political question which he is called
upon to resolve is connected with the interest of the parties, and he
cannot refuse to decide it without being guilty of a denial of justice.
He performs his functions as a citizen by fulfilling the precise duties
which belong to his profession as a magistrate. It is true that upon
this system the judicial censorship which is exercised by the courts of
justice over the acts of the legislature cannot extend to all laws
indefinitely, inasmuch as some of them can never give rise to that
formal species of contestation which is termed a lawsuit; and even when
such a contestation is possible, it may happen that no one is inclined
to carry it into a court of justice.

The Americans have often felt this disadvantage, but they have left the
remedy incomplete, lest they should give it an efficacy which might in
some cases prove dangerous.

Even within these limits, the power vested in the American courts of
justice of pronouncing a statute to be unconstitutional, forms one of
the most powerful barriers which has ever been devised against the
tyranny of political assemblies.

(Reeve, Vol. I, pp. 142-4; Tocqueville, Vol. I, pp. 170-2.)

Having concluded his description of the institutions of the United
States, M. de Tocqueville, in the second volume, proceeds to an
examination of the practical working of those institutions; the
character actually exhibited by democratic government in the American
republic, and the inferences to be thence drawn as to the tendencies of
democracy in general. The following is his statement of the question
between democracy and aristocracy:

We ought carefully to distinguish between the end which the laws have in
view, and the manner in which they pursue it; between their absolute
goodness, and their goodness considered only as means to an end.

Edition: current; Page: [69]
Suppose that the purpose of the legislator is to favour the interest of
the few at the expense of the many; and that his measures are so taken
as to attain the result he aims at, in the shortest time, and with the
least effort possible. The law will be well made, but its purpose will
be evil; and it will be dangerous in the direct ratio of its efficiency.

The laws of a democracy tend in general to the good of the greatest
number; for they emanate from the majority of the entire people, which
may be mistaken, but which cannot have an interest contrary to its own
interest.

The laws of an aristocracy tend, on the contrary, to monopolize wealth
and power in the hands of the small number; because an aristocracy is,
in its very nature, a minority.

We may therefore lay it down as a maxim, that the intentions of a
democracy, in its legislation, are more beneficial to mankind than those
of an aristocracy.

There, however, its advantages terminate.

Aristocracy is infinitely more skilful in the art of legislation than
democracy can be. She is not subject to passing entrainements; she forms
distant projects, and matures them until the favourable opportunity
arrives. Aristocracy proceeds scientifically; she understands the art of
making the aggregate force of all her laws converge at the same time to
one and the same point.

It is otherwise with democracy, her laws are almost always defective or
ill-timed.

The means, therefore, employed by democracy are more imperfect than
those of aristocracy; often, without intending it, she labours to defeat
herself; but her ends are more useful.

Conceive a society which nature, or its own constitution, has so
organized, that it can sustain the temporary agency of bad laws, and is
able, without perishing, to await the result of the general tendency of
the laws, and you will perceive that democratic government, in spite of
its defects, is the fittest government to make that society prosperous.

This is precisely the case of the United States. As I have elsewhere
observed, it is the great privilege of the Americans that they can
commit reparable mistakes.

Something of the same sort may be said as to the appointment of public
functionaries.

It is easy to see that the American democracy is often mistaken in
choosing the men to whom it confides public trusts; but it is not so
easy to say why the state prospers in their hands.

Observe, in the first place, that in a democratic state, if the
governors are less honest or less able, the governed are more
enlightened and more vigilant.

The people, in a democracy, being incessantly occupied with their
affairs, and jealous of their rights, restrain their representatives
from wandering out of a certain general direction, which the interest of
the people points out.

Observe, moreover, that if the magistrate in a democracy uses his power
worse than in another government, he generally possesses it a shorter
time.

But there is a more general, and a more satisfactory, reason than this.

It is, no doubt, of importance to a nation that its rulers should have
virtues or talents; but what is perhaps of still greater importance to
them is, that the rulers shall not have interests contrary to those of
the great mass of the governed. For, in that case, their virtues might
become almost useless, and their talents fatal. . . .

Those who, in the United States, are appointed to the direction of
public affairs, are often inferior in capacity and in morality to those
whom aristocracy would Edition: current; Page: [70] raise to power. But
their interest is blended and identified with that of the majority of
their fellow-citizens. They may therefore commit frequent breaches of
trust, and serious errors; but they will never systematically adopt a
tendency hostile to the majority; and it can never happen to them to
give an exclusive or a dangerous character to their measures of
government.

Besides, the bad administration of a magistrate in a democracy is an
insulated fact, which has influence only during his brief continuance in
office. Corruption and incapacity are not common interests, capable of
producing a permanent alliance among men. A corrupt or incapable
functionary will not unite his efforts with another functionary, for no
reason but because he too is incapable and corrupt, and for the purpose
of making corruption and incapacity flourish in future generations. On
the contrary, the ambition and the manœuvres of the one will serve to
unmask the other. The vices of the magistrate in democracies are in
general wholly personal to himself.

But under an aristocratic government, public men have a class interest,
which, if sometimes in harmony with that of the multitude, is often
distinct from it. That interest forms among them a permanent tie: it
prompts them to ally themselves together, and combine their efforts, for
a purpose which is not always the happiness of the many; and it not only
binds the rulers to one another, it unites them also with a considerable
portion of the governed; for many citizens, without holding any
employment, form a part of the aristocracy. The aristocratic magistrate,
therefore, meets with a constant support in society itself, as well as
in the government.

This common object, which in aristocracies allies the magistrates with
the interests of a portion of their cotemporaries, also identifies them
with that of future generations. They labour for futurity as well as for
the present. The aristocratic functionary is, therefore, pushed in one
and the same direction by the passions of the governed, by his own, and
I might almost say, by the passions of his posterity.

What wonder, if he does not withstand them? Accordingly, in
aristocracies, we often see the class spirit governing even those whom
it does not corrupt, and making them unconsciously strive to accommodate
society to their use, and to leave it as a patrimony to their
descendants. . . .

In the United States, where public functionaries have no class interest
to give predominance to—the general and permanent working of the
government is beneficial, although the governors are often unskilful,
and sometimes despicable.

There is, therefore, in democratic institutions, a hidden tendency,
which often makes men instrumental to the general prosperity in spite of
their vices or their blunders; while in aristocratic institutions there
is sometimes discovered a secret leaning, which, in spite of talents and
virtues, draws them to contribute to the misery of their
fellow-creatures. It is thus that in aristocracies public men sometimes
do ill without meaning it; and in democracies they produce good without
having any thought of it.

(Tocqueville, Vol. II, pp. 108-11.)

These ideas are considerably expanded, and some others added to them, in
other parts of the volume.

In a general way, the following may be given as a summary of M. de
Tocqueville’s opinion on the good and bad tendencies of democracy.

On the favourable side, he holds, that alone among all governments its
Edition: current; Page: [71] systematic and perpetual end is the good of
the immense majority. Were this its only merit, it is one, the absence
of which could ill be compensated by all other merits put together.
Secondly, no other government can reckon upon so willing an obedience,
and so warm an attachment to it, on the part of the people at large.
And, lastly, as it works not only for the people, but, much more
extensively than any other government, by means of the people, it has a
tendency which no other government has in the same degree, to call forth
and sharpen the intelligence of the mass.

The disadvantages which our author ascribes to democracy are chiefly
two:—First, that its policy is much more hasty and short-sighted than
that of aristocracy. In compensation, however, he adds, that it is more
ready to correct its errors, when experience has made them apparent. The
second is, that the interest of the majority is not always identical
with the interest of all; and hence the sovereignty of the majority
creates a tendency on their part to abuse their power over all
minorities.

To commence with the unfavourable side: we may remark, that the evils
which M. de Tocqueville represents as incident to democracy, can only
exist in so far as the people entertain an erroneous idea of what
democracy ought to be. If the people entertained the right idea of
democracy, the mischief of hasty and unskilful legislation would not
exist; and the omnipotence of the majority would not be attended with
any evils.

The difference between the true and the false idea of a representative
democracy, is a subject to which we have drawn attention in a recent
Article.* and it cannot be too often recurred to. All the dangers of
democracy, and all that gives any advantage to its enemies, turn upon
confounding this distinction.

aThe idea of a rational democracy is, not that the people themselves
govern, but that they have bsecurityb for good government. This security
they cannot have, by any other means than by retaining in their own
hands the ultimate control. If they renounce this, they give themselves
up to tyranny. A governing class not accountable to the people are sure,
in the main, to sacrifice the people to the pursuit of separate
interests and inclinations of their own. Even their feelings of
morality, even their ideas of excellence, have reference, not to the
good of the people, but to their own good; their very virtues are class
virtues—their noblest acts of patriotism and self-devotion are but the
sacrifice of their private interests to the interests of their class.
The heroic public virtue of a Leonidas was quite compatible with the
existence Edition: current; Page: [72] of Helots. In no government will
the interests of the people be the object, except where the people are
able to dismiss their rulers as soon as the devotion of those rulers to
the interests of the people becomes questionable. But this is the only
cpurpose for which it is good to intrust power to the peoplec. Provided
good intentions can be secured, the best government, (need it be said?)
must be the government of the wisest, and these must always be a few.
The people ought to be the masters, but they are masters who must employ
servants more skilful than themselves: like a ministry when they employ
a military commander, or the military commander when he employs an
army-surgeon. When the minister ceases to confide in the commander, he
dismisses him, and appoints another; but he does not dsend him
instructions when and where to fight. He holds him responsible only for
eresults. The people must do the same. This does not render the control
of the people nugatory. The control of a government over the commander
of fitsf army is not nugatory. A man’s control over his physician is not
nugatory, galthoughg he does not direct his physician what medicine to
administer. hHe either obeys the prescription of his physician, or, if
dissatisfied with him, takes another. In that consists his security. In
that consists also the people’s security; and with that it is their
wisdom to be satisfied.h

But in government, as in everything else, the danger is, lest those who
can do whatever they will, may will to do more than is for their
ultimate interest. The interest of the people is, to choose for their
rulers the most instructed and the ablest persons who can be found, and
having done so, to allow them to exercise their knowledge and ability
for the good of the people ifreely, or with the least possible
controli—as long as it is the good of the people, and not some private
end, that they are aiming at. A democracy thus administered, would unite
all the good qualities ever possessed by any government. Not only would
its ends be good, but its means would be as well chosen as the wisdom of
the age would allow; and the omnipotence of the majority would be
exercised through the agency and jat the discretionj of an enlightened
minority, accountable to the majority in the last resort.

But it is not possible that the constitution of the democracy itself
should provide adequate security for its being understood and
administered in this spiritk, and not according to the erroneous notion
of democracyk. This rests Edition: current; Page: [73] with the good
sense of the people themselves. If the people can remove their rulers
for one thing, they can for another. That ultimate control, without
which they cannot have security for good government, may, if they
please, be made the means of themselves interfering in the government,
and making their legislators mere delegates for carrying into execution
the preconceived judgment of the majority. If the people do this, they
mistake their interest; and such a government, though better than most
aristocracies, is not the kind of democracy which wise men desire.*

Edition: current; Page: [74]
The substitution of delegation for representation is therefore the one
and only danger of democracy. What is the amount of this danger?

In America, according to M. de Tocqueville, it is not only a great but a
growing danger. “A custom,” says he, “is spreading more and more in the
United States, which tends ultimately to nullify the securities of
representative government. It happens very frequently that the electors,
in naming a representative, lay down a plan of conduct for him, and
impose on him a certain number of positive injunctions, from which he is
by no means to deviate. Tumult excepted, it is exactly as if the
majority itself were to deliberate in general meeting.”*

The experience of America is, in our author’s opinion, equally
unfavourable to the expectation that the people in a democracy are
likely to select as their rulers the ablest men:

Many people in Europe believe without asserting, or assert without
believing, that one of the great advantages of universal suffrage
consists in calling to the direction of public affairs men worthy of
public confidence. The people, it is affirmed, cannot themselves govern,
but they always sincerely desire the public good; and they have an
instinct which seldom fails to point out to them those who are actuated
by a similar desire, and who are the best qualified for the possession
of power.

For myself, I am obliged to say, what I have seen in America does not
warrant me in believing this to be the case. On my arrival in America I
was struck with surprise in discovering to what a degree merit is common
among the governed, and how rare it is among the governors. It is an
unquestionable fact that in our day, in the United States, the most
distinguished men are seldom called to public functions, and one is
forced to acknowledge that this has been more and more the case as
democracy has more and more overstepped her ancient limits. It is
manifest that the race of American statesmen has decidedly dwarted
within the last half-century.

Several causes may be indicated for this phenomenon. It is impossible,
do what we will, to raise the instruction of the people beyond a certain
level. In vain Edition: current; Page: [75] do you facilitate the access
to knowledge, improve the methods of teaching, and render science cheap,
you will never enable persons to instruct themselves, and to develope
their intelligence, without devoting time to it.

The greater or less facility which the people enjoy of living without
labour, constitutes therefore the necessary limit of their intellectual
advancement. That limit is placed higher in some countries, lower in
others, but, for it not to exist, the people must no longer be under the
necessity of occupying themselves with physical labour—that is, they
must cease to be the people. It would be as difficult, therefore, to
imagine a society in which all mankind were highly enlightened, as one
in which they were all rich. I will readily admit that the mass of the
people very sincerely desire the good of the country: I will go farther,
and say that the interior classes appear to me generally to mix with
that desire fewer schemes of personal interest than the higher ranks;
but what is always more or less wanting to them, is the art of judging
of the means, even while sincerely aiming at the end. How long a study,
what a variety of ideas are necessary for forming an accurate conception
of the character of a single person! The greatest geniuses commit
mistakes in the attempt: can it be expected that the multitude should
succeed? The people never have the time or the means to go through this
labour. They are obliged always to judge in haste, and to fasten on the
most salient points. Hence it is that charlatans of all sorts know so
well the secret of pleasing them, while their real friends most
frequently fail.

Besides, what prevents the democracy from choosing persons of merit is
not always want of the capacity, but want of the desire and the
inclination.

It cannot be dissembled that democratic institutions develope, to a very
high degree, the feeling of envy in the human breast. This is not so
much because those institutions offer to every one the means of rising
to the level of others, but because those means are perpetually tried
and found wanting Democratic institutions call forth and flatter the
passion for equality, without ever being able to give it complete
satisfaction.

Many persons imagine that the secret instinct which, with us, leads the
interior classes to exclude the superior as much as they can from the
direction of their affairs, is seen only in France. This is an error.
The instinct is not a French, but a democratic instinct. Our political
circumstances may have given it a peculiar character of bitterness, but
they are not the cause of it.

In the United States the people have no hatred for the higher classes of
society, but they feel little good-will towards those classes, and
exclude them carefully from the government. They are not afraid of great
talents, but they have little relish for them. In general it may be
remarked, that whatever raises itself without the people’s assistance,
finds little favour in their eyes.

I am satisfied that those who consider universal suffrage as a security
for a good choice, are under a complete illusion. Universal suffrage has
other advantages, but it has not that.

(Tocqueville, Vol. II, pp. 43-7.)

Considered as matter of evidence—as the testimony of a highly-qualified
observer—these statements deserve the utmost attention. It is for that
reason that we quote them. For ourselves, we see much to be said in
qualification of them; and this, too, our author’s own pages in part
supply. A little farther on, after remarking that in America, from the
frequent changes in the persons raised to office by the elective
principle, a public function cannot, as in Edition: current; Page: [76]
Europe, be considered a provision for life, he adds, as a consequence of
this fact—

Hence it follows that in quiet times public functions offer little
allurement to ambition. In the United States it is those who are
moderate in their desires that engage in public business. The men of
great talents and great passions usually abandon the pursuit of power,
and engage in that of riches; and it often happens that the person who
undertakes to direct the concerns of the public, is he who feels himself
little capable of successfully conducting his own.

It is to these causes, as much as to the bad choice of the people, that
we must ascribe the great number of inferior men who occupy public
situations. I know not whether the people of the United States would
choose superior men if they sought to be chosen, but it is certain that
they do not seek it.

(Tocqueville, Vol. II, pp. 58-9.)

The fact that the ablest men seldom offer themselves to the people’s
suffrages, is still more strongly stated by our author in another place,
and is a point on which there is a striking concurrence of testimony. It
may be said that they do not present themselves because they know that
they would not be chosen; but a reason less discreditable to the
American people was given to our author’s fellow-traveller, M. de
Beaumont,* by an American: “Comment voulez-vous qu’un médecin se montre
habile, si vous mettez entre ses mains un homme bien portant?” The truth
is that great talents are not needed for carrying on, in ordinary times,
the government of an already well-ordered society. In a country like
America little government is required: the people are prosperous, and
the machinery of the state works so smoothly, by the agency of the
people themselves, that there is next to nothing for the government to
do. When no great public end is to be compassed; when no great abuse
calls for remedy, no national danger for resistance, the mere everyday
business of politics is an occupation little worthy of any mind of
first-rate powers, and very little alluring to it. In a settled state of
things, the commanding intellects will always prefer to govern mankind
from their closets, by means of literature and science, leaving the
mechanical details of government to mechanical minds.

In national emergencies, which call out the men of first-rate talents,
such men always step into their proper place, M. de Tocqueville admits,
that during the struggle for independence, and the scarcely less
difficult struggle which succeeded it, to keep the confederacy together,
the choice of the people fell almost invariably upon the first men in
the country. Such a body of men as composed the assembly which framed
the federal constitution, never were Edition: current; Page: [77]
brought together at any period of history. No wonder that, when compared
with them, the present generation of public men appear like dwarfs. But
are they such when compared with the present race of English statesmen?
Which of these could have drawn such a state paper as President
Jackson’s address to the people of South Carolina, or framed Mr.
Livingston’s Draught of a Penal Code?[*]

M. de Tocqueville also states that the tendency, which he deems inherent
in democracy, to be satisfied with a bad choice, manifests itself in a
very mitigated degree in the older and more civilized states:

In New England, where education and liberty are the outgrowth of
morality and religion—where society, already old and long-established,
has been able to form habits and maxims—the people, while quite
independent of all the superiorities which were ever created among
mankind by riches or birth, have accustomed themselves to respect
intellectual and moral superiorities, and to submit to them without
reluctance. Accordingly we see that in New England the democracy makes a
far better choice of public functionaries than any where else.

In proportion as we descend towards the south, and reach the states in
which the bonds of society are less ancient and less strong—where
instruction is less diffused—and where the principles of morality of
religion and of liberty, are less happily combined, we may perceive that
talents and virtues become more and more rare among public men.

When we penetrate at length to the new states in the south-west, where
the social union is but of yesterday, and presents as yet only an
agglomeration of adventurers or speculators, one is confounded at the
sight of the hands in which the powers of government are placed: and one
asks oneself by what force, independent of legislation and of the ruling
power, the state is able to advance and the people to prosper.

(Tocqueville, Vol. II. pp. 49-50.)

In these important statements, our author bears testimony to the effects
not merely of national education, but of mere lapse of time, and the
growth of population and wealth, in correcting more and more the
liability of the people to make a mistaken choice of representatives.

But put these evils at their worst: let them be as great as it is
possible they should be in a tolerably educated nation: suppose that the
people do not choose the fittest men, and that whenever they have an
opinion of their own, they compel their representatives, without the
exercise of any discretion, merely to give execution to that
opinion—thus adopting the false idea of democracy propagated by its
enemies, and by some of its injudicious friends—the consequence would no
doubt be abundance of unskilful legislation. But would the abundance,
after all, be so much greater than in most aristocracies? In the English
aristocracy there has surely been, at all periods, Edition: current;
Page: [78] vwcrude and ill-considered legislation enough. Thisw is the
character of all governments whose laws are made, and acts of
administration performed, impromptu, not in pursuance of a general
design, but from the pressure of some present occasion: of all
governments, in which the ruling power is to any great extent exercised
by persons not trained to government as a business.v

In attributing, as general characteristics, prudence and steadiness to
aristocratic governments, our author has, we think, generalized on an
insufficient examination of the facts on which his conclusion is
founded. The only steadiness which aristocracy never fails to manifest,
is tenacity in clinging to its own privileges. Democracy is equally
tenacious of the fundamental maxims of its own government. In all other
matters, xythey opinion of a zruling class is as fluctuating, as liable
to be wholly given up to immediate impulses, as the opinion of the
people. Witness the whole course of English history. All our laws have
been made upon temporary impulses. In awhat country has the course of
legislation been less directed to any steady and consistent
purpose?ax—except, indeed, that of perpetually adding to the power and
privileges of the rich; and that, not because of the deep-laid schemes,
but because of the passions, of the ruling class. And as for the talents
and virtues of those whom aristocracy chooses for its leaders, read
Horace Walpole or Bubb Doddington, that you may know what to think of
them.

M. de Tocqueville has, we think, affirmed of aristocracy in general,
what should have been predicated only of some particular aristocracies.
bIt is true that the governments which have been celebrated for their
profound policy have generally been aristocracies. But they have been
very narrow aristocracies: consisting of so few members, that every
member could personally participate in the business of administration.
These are the governments which have a natural tendency to be
administered steadily—that is, according to fixed principles. Every
member of the governing body being trained to government as a
profession, like other professions, they respect precedent, transmit
their experience from generation to generation, acquire and preserve a
set of traditions, and, all being competent judges of each other’s
Edition: current; Page: [79] merits, the ablest easily rises to his
proper level. The governments c(so unlike in other respects)c of ancient
Rome, and modern Venice, were of this character; and, as all know, for
ages conducted the affairs of those states with admirable constancy and
skill, upon fixed principles, often unworthy enough, but always
eminently adapted to the ends of dthesed governments.b

These aristocracies, however, which manifest the most skill in adapting
their means to their ends, are distinguished even beyond other
aristocracies in the badness of their ends. So narrow an aristocracy is
cut off, even more completely than a more numerous one, from
fellow-feeling with the people; and any other aristocracy, we conceive,
has not the advantages ascribed to that government by M. de Tocqueville.

eWhen the governing body, whether it fconsistf of the many or of a
privileged class, is so numerous, that the large majority of it do not
and cannot make the practice of government the main occupation of their
lives, it is gutterlyg impossible that there should be wisdom,
foresight, and caution in the governing body itself. These qualities
must be found, if found at all, not in the body, but in those whom the
body trust.e If the people in America, or the higher classes in England
or France, make a practice of themselves dictating and prescribing the
measures of government, it is impossible that those countries should be
otherwise than ill administered. There has been ample proof of this in
the government of England, where we have had, at all times, the
clumsiness of an ill-regulated democracy, with a very small portion
indeed of her good intentions.

In a numerous aristocracy, as well as in a democracy, the sole chance
for considerate and wise government lies not in the wisdom of the
democracy or of the aristocracy themselves, but in their willingness to
place themselves under the guidance of the wisest among them. And it
would be difficult for democracy to exhibit less of this willingness
than has been shown by the English aristocracy in all periods of their
history, or less than is shown by them at this moment.

But, while we do not share all the apprehensions of M. de Tocqueville
from the unwillingness of the people to be guided by superior wisdom,
and while this source of evil tells for very little with us in the
comparison between democracy and aristocracy, we consider our author
entitled to applause and gratitude for having probed this subject so
unsparingly, and given us so striking a picture of his own impressions;
and we are clearly of opinion that his fears, whether excessive or not,
are in the right place. If democracy should Edition: current; Page: [80]
disappoint any of the expectations of its more enlightened partisans, it
will be from the substitution of delegation for representation; of the
crude and necessarily superficial judgment of the people themselves, for
the judgment of those whom the people, having confidence in their
honesty, have selected as the wisest guardians whose services they could
command. All the chances unfavourable to democracy lie here; and whether
the danger be much or little, all who see it ought to unite their
efforts to reduce it to the minimum.

We have no space to follow M. de Tocqueville into the consideration of
any of the palliatives which may be found for this evil tendency. We
pass to that which he regards as the most serious of the inconveniences
of democracy, and that to which, if the American republic should perish,
it will owe its fall. This is, the omnipotence of the majority.

M. de Tocqueville’s fears from this source are not of the kind which
haunt the imaginations of English alarmists. He finds, under the
American democracy, no tendency on the part of the poor to oppress the
rich—to molest them in their persons or in their property. That the
security of person and property are the first social interests not only
of the rich but of the poor, is obvious to common sense. And the degree
of education which a well-constituted democracy ensures to all its
citizens, renders common sense the general characteristic. Truths which
are obvious, it may always be expected that the American democracy will
see. It is true, no one need expect that, in a democracy, to keep up a
class of rich people living in splendour and affluence will be treated
as a national object, which legislation should be directed to promote,
and which the rest of the community should be taxed for. But there has
never been any complaint that property in general is not protected in
America, or that large properties do not meet with every protection
which is given to small ones. Not even in the mode of laying on taxes
have we seen any complaint that favour is shown to the poor at the
expense of the rich.

But when we put inequalities of property out of the question, it is not
easy to see what sort of minority it can be, over which the majority can
have any interest in tyrannizing. The only standing and organized
minority which exists in any community, constituted as communities
usually are, is the rich. All other minorities are fluctuating, and he
who is in the majority to-day is in the minority to-morrow: each in his
turn is liable to this kind of oppression; all, therefore, are
interested in preventing it from having existence.

The only cases which we can think of, as forming possible exceptions to
this rule, are cases of antipathy on the part of one portion of the
people towards another: the antipathies of religion, for example, or of
race. Where these exist, iniquity will be committed, under any form of
government, aristocratic or democratic, unless in a higher state of
moral and intellectual improvement than any community has hitherto
attained.

Edition: current; Page: [81]
M. de Tocqueville’s fears, however, are not so much for the security and
the ordinary worldly interests of individuals, as for the moral dignity
and progressiveness of the race. It is a tyranny exercised over
opinions, more than over persons, which he is apprehensive of. He dreads
lest all individuality of character, and independence of thought and
sentiment, should be prostrated under the despotic yoke of public
opinion.

When we come to examine in what condition, in the United States, is the
exercise of thought, it is then that we see clearly how far the power of
the majority surpasses any power which we know in Europe.

Thought is an invisible and almost unconfinable force, which laughs at
all tyrannies. In our time, the most absolute princes of Europe cannot
prevent certain ideas, hostile to their authority, from circulating
underhand in their dominions, and even in the midst of their courts. It
is otherwise in America: as long as the majority is in doubt, there is
discussion; but as soon as it has irrevocably decided, all hold their
peace; and friends and enemies seem equally to yoke themselves to its
car. The reason is simple. No monarch, however absolute, can concentrate
in his own hands all the influences of society, and vanquish all
resistance, as a majority, invested with the power of making and
executing the laws, can do.

A king, besides, wields only a physical power, which controls the
actions but cannot influence the inclinations, but the majority is
possessed of a power at once physical and moral, which acts upon the
will as much as upon the conduct, and restrains at once the act and the
desire to perform it.

I am acquainted with no country in which there reigns, in general, less
independence of mind, and real freedom of discussion, than in America.

There is no theory, religious or political, which cannot be freely
promulgated in the constitutional states of Europe, or which does not
penetrate into the others; for there is no country in Europe so
completely subjected to one power, that he who wishes to speak the truth
may not find a support sufficient to protect him against the
consequences of his independence. If he has the misfortune to live under
an absolute monarchy, he often has the people with him; if he inhabits a
free country, he can, in case of need, shelter himself under the royal
authority. The aristocratic fraction of society sustains him in the
democratic countries, and the democracy in the others. But in a
democracy organized like that of the United States, there exists only
one power, one single source of influence and success, and nothing
beyond its limits.

In America, the majority traces a formidable circle around the province
of thought. Within that boundary the writer is free, but woe to him if
he dare to overstep it. He needs not indeed fear an auto-da-fe; but he
is a mark for every-day persecutions, and subject to an infinity of
chagrins. To him the career of politics is closed; he has offended the
sole power which could admit him into it. All is refused to him, even
glory. Before he published his opinions, he fancied that he had
partisans; now, when he has discovered himself to all, he seems to have
them no longer; for those who disapprove blame him openly, and those who
think with him, without having his courage, are silent and keep aloof.
He yields, he bends at last under the burden of daily efforts, and is
again silent, as if he felt remorse for having spoken the truth. . . .

In the proudest nations of the old world, books have been published
destined to depict faithfully the vices and the ridicules of the age. La
Bruyère lived in the Edition: current; Page: [82] palace of Louis XIV
when he composed his chapter sur les grands;[*] and Molière satirized
the court in pieces written to be represented before the courtiers. But
the power which is predominant in the United States will not be thus
trifled with. The slightest reproach offends it; the smallest trait of
piquant truth excites its anger; everything must be lauded, from the
turn of its phraseology to its most solid virtues. No writer, whatever
his renown, is exempted from this obligation of offering incense to his
countrymen. The majority, therefore, lives in a perpetual adoration of
itself. Foreigners only, or experience, can make certain truths reach
the ears of the Americans.

If America has not yet had great writers, we need not look farther for
the reason. There is no literary genius but where there is freedom of
thought, and there is no freedom of thought in America.

(Tocqueville, Vol. II, pp. 149-53.)

M. de Tocqueville complains that the courtier-spirit, which in other
governments is confined to those who immediately surround the persons of
the powerful, is universal in America, because there every one has
access to the sovereign’s ear.

In free countries, where every one is called upon, more or less, to give
his opinion on affairs of state; in democratic republics, where public
and private life are intimately blended, where the sovereign is
everywhere accessible, and to reach his ear one has only to raise one’s
voice, many more persons are tempted to speculate upon the sovereign’s
weaknesses, and live at the expense of his passions, than in absolute
monarchies. It is not that men are naturally worse there than elsewhere;
but the temptation is stronger, and offers itself to more persons at
once. There results a much more general degradation of soul.

Democratic republics bring the courtier-spirit within the reach of
almost everybody, and make it penetrate into all classes at once. This
is one of their greatest inconveniences.

This is more particularly true in democratic states constituted like the
American republics, where the majority possesses an empire so absolute
and so irresistible, that whoever quits the path it has traced out must
in a manner renounce the rights of citizenship, and almost those of
humanity.

Among the immense multitude who, in the United States, crowd into the
career of politics. I have seen very few who evinced that manly candour,
that vigorous independence of thought, which has often distinguished the
Americans of former times, and which, wherever it is found, is as it
were the salient feature of a great character. At first sight one would
say that in America all intellects have been cast in the same mould, so
exactly do they all follow the same paths. A foreigner, indeed,
occasionally encounters Americans who emancipate themselves from the
yoke of the prescribed opinions, these sometimes deplore the defects of
the laws, the versatility of the democracy, and its want of enlightened
wisdom; they even go so far as to remark the faults of the national
character, and point out the means which might be taken to correct them,
but nobody, except yourself, is within hearing, and you, to whom they
confide these secret thoughts, are but a foreigner, and about to depart.
They willingly make you a present of truths which are to you of no use,
and when they address the public they hold quite a different language.

Edition: current; Page: [83]
If these lines ever reach America, I feel assured of two things: the
one, that all my readers will raise their voices in condemnation of me;
the other, that many of them will acquit me in the secrecy of their
conscience.

I have heard Americans talk of the love of their country, I have met
with real patriotism in the mass of the people; I have often looked for
it in vain in those by whom the people are led. This is intelligible by
analogy. Despotism is much more depraving to those who submit to it than
to those who impose it. In an absolute monarchy, the king often has
great virtues, but the courtiers are always vile.

It is true that the courtiers in America do not say, Sire, and Your
Majesty—a grand and capital distinction! But they talk incessantly of
the natural judgment of their master: they do not propose, as a
prize-question, to determine which of the prince’s virtues merits the
greatest admiration: for they declare that he possesses all virtues,
without having learned them, and almost independently of his own will:
they do not offer to him their wives and daughters, that he may deign to
raise them to the rank of his mistresses: but in sacrificing their
opinions to him, they prostitute themselves.

Moralists and philosophers are not obliged, in America, to wrap up their
opinions in the cloak of an allegory: but, before risking a disagreeable
truth, they say, “We know that we are addressing a people too superior
to human weaknesses not to remain always master of itself. We should not
hold such a language were we not speaking to men whom their virtues and
their instruction render alone, among all nations, worthy to remain
free.”

What could the flatterers of Louis XIV do more?

(Tocqueville, Vol. II, pp. 155-8.)

This picture, whether overcharged or not, exhibits evils, the liability
to which is inherent in human nature itself. Whatever be the ruling
power, whether the One, the Few, or the Many, to that power all who have
private interests to serve, or who seek to rise by mean arts, will
habitually address themselves. In a democracy, the natural resource of
all such persons will be to flatter the inclination towards substituting
delegation for representation. All who have a bad cause will be anxious
to carry it before the least discerning tribunal which can be found. All
individuals and all classes who are aiming at anything, which, in a
government where the most instructed had the ascendancy, they would not
be allowed to have, will of course in a democracy, as they do in the
English aristocracy, endeavour to bring superior instruction into
disrepute; and to persuade the many, that their own common sense is
quite sufficient, and that the pretenders to superior wisdom are either
dreamers or charlatans.

From this tendency it cannot be expected that, in any government, great
evils should not arise. Mankind must be much improved before we obtain a
democracy not characterised by the absence of enlarged and commanding
views. But, without pretending ourselves competent to judge whether our
author overstates the evils as they exist in America, we can see reasons
for thinking that they would exist in a far inferior degree in Europe.

Edition: current; Page: [84]
America is not only destitute of the very equivocal advantage so
strongly dwelt upon by our author, the existence of classes having a
private interest in protecting opinions contrary to those of the
majority; she labours, also, under a much more serious deficiency. In
America there is no highly instructed class; no numerous body raised
sufficiently above the common level, in education, knowledge, or
refinement, to inspire the rest with any reverence for distinguished
mental superiority, or any salutary sense of the insufficiency of their
own wisdom. Our author himself was struck with the general equality of
intelligence and mental cultivation in America. He has, moreover, fully
accounted for the fact.

The equality which exists in America is not confined to fortune; it
extends, in a certain degree, to intellects themselves.

I do not believe, that in any country in the world there are found, in
proportion to the population, so few uninstructed persons, or fewer
persons who are highly instructed.

Elementary instruction is within the reach of everybody: superior
instruction is hardly attainable by any.

This is easily intelligible; it is the almost necessary result of the
facts already stated.

Almost all Americans are in easy circumstances, they can therefore
easily procure the first elements of human knowledge.

In America, few persons are rich; almost all the Americans are therefore
obliged to engage in a profession. But all professions require an
apprenticeship. The Americans, therefore, can only give their earliest
years to the general cultivation of their intellects. At fifteen they
enter into the business of life; and their education usually ends where
ours may be said to begin. If it continues farther, it is directed only
to some special and money-getting end. They study a science as they
learn a trade, and attend to none of its applications but those which
tend to an immediate practical object.

In America, most rich people were originally poor; nearly all the people
of leisure were in their youth people of business. The consequence is,
that when they might have a taste for study they have not time for it;
and when they have acquired the leisure, they have ceased to have the
inclination.

There exists, therefore, in America, no class, in which the relish for
intellectual pleasures is transmitted along with hereditary affluence
and leisure, and which holds in honour the labours of the intellect.

Accordingly, both the will and the power to undertake those labours are
wanting in America.

There has established itself in America, in respect to knowledge, a
certain level of mediocrity. All intellects have approximated themselves
to this level; some have risen up to it; others have come down to it.

There are therefore found an immense multitude of individuals possessing
very nearly the same number of ideas in religion, in history, in the
sciences, in political economy, in legislation, and in government.*

Edition: current; Page: [85]
When all are in nearly the same pecuniary circumstances, all educated
nearly alike, and all employed nearly alike, it is no wonder if all
think nearly alike; and where this is the case, it is but natural, that
when here and there a solitary individual thinks differently, nobody
minds him. These are exactly the circumstances in which public opinion
is generally so unanimous, that it has most chance to be in reality, and
is sure to be in appearance, intolerant of the few who happen to dissent
from it.

M. de Tocqueville has himself told us, that there is no indisposition in
the Many of the United States to pay deference to the opinions of an
instructed class, where such a class exists, and where there are obvious
signs by which it may be recognized. He tells us this, by what he says
of the extraordinary influence of the lawyers—in his opinion one of the
great causes which tend to restrain the abuse of the power of the
majority. We recommend especial attention to the section devoted to this
topic. (Tocqueville, Vol. II, p. 165.)

The faults incident to the character of a lawyer, in our author’s
opinion, happily counterbalance those to which democracy is liable. The
lawyer is naturally a lover of precedent; his respect for established
rules and established formalities is apt to be unreasonable; the spirit
of his profession is everywhere a stationary spirit. He usually has in
excess the qualities in which democracy is apt to be deficient. His
influence, therefore, is naturally exerted to correct that deficiency.

If the minds of lawyers were not, both in England and America, almost
universally perverted by the barbarous system of technicalities—the
opprobrium of human reason—which their youth is passed in committing to
memory, and their manhood in administering,—we think with our author
that they are the class in whom superiority of instruction, produced by
superior study, would most easily obtain the stamp of general
recognition; and that they would be the natural leaders of a people
destitute of a leisured class.

But in countries which, if in some respects worse, are in the other
respects far more happily situated than America; in countries where
there exist endowed institutions for education, and a numerous class
possessed of hereditary leisure, there is a security, far greater than
has ever existed in America, against the tyranny of public opinion over
the individual mind. Even if the profession of opinions different from
those of the mass were an exclusion from public employment—to a leisured
class offices moderately paid, and without a particle of irresponsible
authority, hold out little allurement, and the diminution of their
chance of obtaining them would not be severely felt. A leisured class
would always possess a power sufficient not only to protect in
themselves, but to encourage in others, the enjoyment of Edition:
current; Page: [86] individuality of thought; and would keep before the
eyes of the many, what is of so much importance to them, the spectacle
of a standard of mental cultivation superior to their own. Such a class,
too, would be able, by means of combination, to force upon the rest of
the public attention to their opinions. In America, all large minorities
exercise this power; even, as in the case of the tariff, to the extent
of electing a convention, composed of representatives from all parts of
the country, which deliberates in public, and issues manifestoes in the
name of its party. A class composed of all the most cultivated
intellects in the country; of those who, from their powers and their
virtues, would command the respect of the people, even in combating
their prejudices—such a class would be almost irresistible in its action
on public opinion. In the existence of a leisured class, we see the
great and salutary corrective of all the inconveniences to which
democracy is liable. We cannot, under any modification of the laws of
England, look forward to a period when this grand security for the
progressiveness of the human species will not exist.

While, therefore, we see in democracy, as in every other state of
society or form of government, possibilities of evil, which it would ill
serve the cause of democracy itself to dissemble or overlook; while we
think that the world owes a deep debt to M. de Tocqueville for having
warned it of these, for having studied the failings and weaknesses of
democracy with the anxious attention with which a parent watches the
faults of a child, or a careful seaman those of the vessel in which he
embarks his property and his life; we see nothing in any of these
tendencies, from which any serious evil need be apprehended, if the
superior spirits would but join with each other in considering the
instruction of the democracy, and not the patching of the old worn-out
machinery of aristocracy, the proper object henceforth of all rational
exertion. No doubt, the government which will be achieved will long be
extremely imperfect, for mankind are as yet in a very early stage of
improvement. But if half the exertions were made to prepare the minds of
the majority for the place they are about to take in their own
government, which are made for the chimerical purpose of preventing them
from assuming that place, mankind would purchase at a cheap price safety
from incalculable evils, and the benefit of a government indefinitely
improveable; the only possible government which, to ensure the greatest
good of the community subject to it, has only to take an enlightened
view of its own.

We shall conclude this article with some striking passages from M. de
Tocqueville, illustrative of the collateral benefits of democracy, even
in the imperfect form in which he states it to exist in America; where
the people, not content with security for good government, are to a
great degree the government itself.

After mankind have outgrown the child-like, unreflecting, and almost
Edition: current; Page: [87] instinctive love of country, which
distinguishes a rude age, patriotism and public spirit, as a sentiment
diffused through the community, can only exist under a democracy:

There is a love of country which takes its rise principally in the
unreflecting, disinterested, and undefinable sentiment which attaches
the heart of man to the place of his birth. This instinctive affection
is blended with the taste for old customs, with the respect for
ancestors, and with historical recollections; those who experience it
cherish their country with a feeling resembling the love of our paternal
home. They love the tranquillity which they enjoy in it, they relish the
peaceful habits which they have contracted in it, they are attached to
the recollections it affords them, and even find some pleasure in
passing in it a life of obedience. This love of country often acquires a
still more energetic character from religious zeal, and then it performs
wonders. It is itself a kind of religion, it does not reason, it
believes, feels, and acts. Nations have been known to personify their
country (if we may so speak) in the person of their prince. They have
then transferred to him a part of the sentiments of which patriotism is
composed, they have been proud of his power, and elated by his triumph.
There was a time, under the old monarchy, when Frenchmen felt a kind of
joy in feeling themselves irredeemably subject to the arbitrary power of
the monarch, they said with pride. “We live under the most powerful
monarch in the world.”

Like all unreflecting passions, this love of country excites to great
temporary efforts rather than to continuous exertion. After saving the
country in a time of emergency, it often allows it to perish by inches
in the midst of peace.

While mankind are as yet simple in their manners, and firm in their
belief—while society rests quietly upon old-established social
arrangements, of which the legitimacy is not contested—this instinctive
love of country is in its vigour.

There is another kind of patriotism, more reasoning than the former,
less generous, less ardent, perhaps, but more fruitful and more durable.
This feeling is the result of instruction; it unfolds itself by aid of
the laws, it grows with the exercise of political rights, and ends by
becoming in a manner, identified with personal interest. The individual
comprehends the influence which the good of the country has over his own
good, he knows that the law permits him to bear his part in producing
that good, and he takes interest in the prosperity of his country,
first, as a thing useful to himself, and next, as in part the result of
his own efforts.

But there sometimes comes a time in the history of nations, when old
customs are changed, old habits destroyed old convictions shaken; when
the prestige of the past disappears, and when, nevertheless, instruction
is still incomplete, and political rights ill secured or restricted.
Mankind then see their country through a dim and uncertain medium they
no longer place it in the mere soil, which to them has become inanimate
earth, nor in the usages of their ancestors, which they have been taught
to consider as a yoke, nor in their religion of which they have begun to
doubt: nor in the laws, which are not of their own making, nor in the
legislator, whom they dread and despise. They see it, therefore,
nowhere: neither where it is, nor where it is not and they retire within
a narrow and unenlightened self-interest. Men in this state of things
throw off prejudices, without recognizing the empire of reason, they
have neither the instinctive patriotism of monarchy, nor the reflecting
patriotism of a republic, they have stopped short betwixt the two, in
confusion and wretchedness.

Edition: current; Page: [88]
What is then to be done? To go back? But a people can no more return to
the feelings of their youth, than a man to the innocent pleasures of his
infantine years, they may regret, but cannot revive them. There is
nothing for us but to go forward, and hasten to identify in the minds of
the people individual interest with the public interest: the
disinterested love of country is gone, not to return.

I am assuredly far from pretending, that to arrive at this result
political rights should be suddenly extended to all mankind. But I say
that the most potent, and perhaps the only means which remain, of
interesting the whole people in the fate of their country, is to make
them participate in its government. In our times, the feelings of a
citizen seem to me to be inseparable from the exercise of political
rights; and I think that henceforth we shall see in Europe the number of
good citizens increase or diminish, in proportion to the extension of
those rights.

Whence comes it, that in the United States, where the inhabitants have
arrived but yesterday on the soil which they occupy; where they have
brought with them neither usages nor recollections; where they meet each
other for the first time without knowing each other; where, to say all
in one word, the instinct of country can hardly exist; whence comes it
that every one is as interested in the affairs of his township, of his
district, and of the state itself, as he is in his private concerns? It
is because every one, in his sphere, takes an active part in the
government of society.

The man of the lowest class, in the United States, has taken into his
mind the influence which the general prosperity has on his own
happiness, a notion so simple, and yet so little known to the people.
More than this,—he is accustomed to regard that prosperity as partly his
own work. He sees, therefore, in the fortunes of the public his own
fortunes, and he co-operates for the good of the state, not merely from
pride, or from a sense of duty, but I might almost say from cupidity.

(Tocqueville, Vol. II, pp. 114-17.)

In a democracy only can there ever again be, on the part of the
community generally, a willing and conscientious obedience to the laws:

It is not always expedient to call the entire people, either directly or
indirectly, to contribute to the framing of the law, but it cannot be
denied, that, when this is practicable, the law acquires thereby a great
authority. That popular origin, which is often injurious to the goodness
and wisdom of legislation, augments in a remarkable degree its power.

There is in the expression of the will of a whole people a prodigious
force; and when this force displays itself in open day, the imaginations
even of those who would willingly resist it are, as it were, overwhelmed
by it.

The truth of this is well known to political parties. Accordingly, we
find them contesting the majority, wherever it is contestable. When they
have it not among those who have voted, they insist that they would have
had it among those who have abstained from voting; and when it escapes
them even there, they claim it again among those who had not the right
of voting.

In the United States, excepting slaves, menial servants, and the paupers
maintained by the townships, there is no man who is not an elector, and
who in that capacity has not an indirect influence in making the law.
Those, therefore, who wish to attack the laws are reduced to do
ostensibly one of two things—they must either change the opinion of the
nation, or be able to trample upon its will.

To this first reason is to be added another, more direct and more
powerful. In Edition: current; Page: [89] the United States every one
has a kind of personal interest in a universal obedience to the law; for
he who to-day is not in the majority, will perhaps form part of it
to-morrow; and the respect he now professes for the will of the
legislator, he may soon have occasion to exact for his own. The
inhabitant of the United States submits, therefore, to the law, (however
disagreeable to him,) not only as the work of the majority, but also as
his own; he looks at it in the light of a contract, to which he is a
party.

We do not, therefore, see in the United States a numerous and always
turbulent crowd, who, regarding the law as their natural enemy, view it
with no eyes but those of fear and suspicion. It is impossible, on the
contrary, not to see that the mass of the people evince a great
confidence in the legislation which governs the country, and feel for it
a sort of paternal affection.

(Vol. II, pp. 123-5.)

Of the general activity, and the diffusion of intelligence, which are
the fruits of democracy,

It is incontestable, that the people often direct public affairs very
ill: but the people cannot meddle in public affairs without the circle
of their ideas being extended, and their minds emancipated from their
ordinary routine. The man of the lower class, who exercises a part in
the government of society, conceives a certain esteem for himself. As he
is then a power in the state, intellects of a high order of instruction
devote themselves to the service of his intellect. He sees on all sides
of him people address themselves to him, courting his support: and in
seeking to deceive him in a thousand different ways, they enlighten him.
In politics he takes part in undertakings which have not originated with
himself, but which give him a general taste for enterprises. Every day
there are suggested to him new improvements to be made in the common
property and he feels his desire sharpened to ameliorate that which is
his own. He is neither more virtuous nor happier, perhaps, but he is
more enlightened and more active than his predecessors. I am satisfied
that democratic institutions, combined with the physical character of
the country, are the cause—not, as so many people say, the direct, but
the indirect cause—of the prodigious industrial prosperity observable in
the United States. The laws do not generate it, but the people learn to
produce it in making the laws.

When the enemies of democracy affirm that a single person does better
what he undertakes, than the government of All, they seem to me to be in
the right. The government of One, if we suppose on both sides equality
of instruction, has more suite in its undertakings than the multitude,
it shows more perseverance, a more comprehensive plan, more perfection
in the details, a juster discernment in the selection of individuals.
Those who deny these things have never seen a democratic republic, or
have judged of it from a small number of examples. Democracy, even where
local circumstances and the state of the people’s minds permit it to
subsist, does not present a spectacle of administrative regularity and
methodical order in the government—that is true. Democratic freedom does
not execute each of its enterprises with the same perfection as an
intelligent despotism. It often abandons them without having reaped
their fruit, or undertakes such as are perilous. But in the long run it
produces greater results, it does less well each particular thing, but
it does a greater number of things. Under its empire, what is truly
great is, not what the public administration does, but what is done
without it, and independently of its aid. Democracy does not give to the
people the most Edition: current; Page: [90] skilful government, but it
does what the most skilful government is often unable to do,—it diffuses
through all society a restless activity, a superabundance of force, an
energy, which never exist where democracy is not, and which, wherever
circumstances are at all favourable, may give birth to prodigies.
Therein consist its true advantages.

(Tocqueville, Vol. II, pp. 130-2.)

We must here pause. We have left many interesting parts of the book
altogether unnoticed; and among the rest two most instructive
chapters—“On the Causes which maintain Democracy in America,” (among the
foremost of these he places the religious spirit, and among the chief
causes which maintain that spirit, the removal of religion from the
field of politics by the entire separation of church and state,) and “On
the Condition and Prospects of the three Races,” black, white, and red.
We have preferred giving the reader a full idea of part of M. de
Tocqueville’s work, rather than a mere abstract of the whole. But we
earnestly recommend the study of the entire work, both to the
philosophical statesman and to the general reader; and to facilitate its
reaching the latter, we greatly rejoice at its appearance in an English
dress.

Edition: current; Page: [91]


STATE OF SOCIETY IN AMERICA
 1836

Edition: current; Page: [92]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London Review, II (Jan., 1836), 365-89 (equivalent to Westminster
Review, XXXI). Headed: “Art V. / State of Society in America. / 1.
Marie; ou l’Esclavage aux Etats Unis, Tableau de Mœurs / Américaines;
par Gustave de Beaumont, l’un des Auteurs de / l’Ouvrage [sic] intitulé:
Du Systême Pénitentiaire aux Etats / Unis. Seconde Edition, revue et
corrigée [Paris: Gosselin], 1835. 2 vols. / 2. Journal of a Residence
and Tour in the United States of North America, from April, 1833, to
October, 1834. By E. / S. Abdy, Fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge.
1835. 3 vols. [London:] Murray. / 3. The Rambler in North America:
1832-1833. By Charles / Joseph Latrobe, author of the ‘Alpenstock,’ &c.
1835. / 2 vols. [London:] Seeley and Burnside. / 4. The Stranger in
America: comprising Sketches of the Manners, Society, and National
Peculiarities of the United / States: in a Series of Letters to a Friend
in Europe. By / Francis Lieber, Editor of the Encyclopædia Americana. /
1835. 2 vols. [London:] Bentley. / 5. [Alexander Hill Everett,] A Review
of Men and Manners in America. By [Thomas Hamilton,] the author of
‘Cyril Thornton.’ Reprinted from the North American Review [XXXVIII].
1834. [London:] Miller, Henrietta Street.” Signed “A.” Running title:
“State of Society in America.” Not republished. Identified in JSM’s
bibliography as “An article entitled ‘State of Society in America,’
being a review of works on the United States; in the fourth number of
the London Review.” (MacMinn, 46.) The copy of the article in the
Somerville College Library has no corrections or emendations. There are
no references to the writing of the article in the Autobiography or
extant letters.

Edition: current; Page: [93]


State of Society in America

two sources of instruction, which, however highly appreciated in name,
have remained, till near the present time, almost entirely useless in
fact, are beginning at length to be turned to some account: we mean,
history and travelling. Intelligent investigation into past ages, and
intelligent study of foreign countries, have commenced: both processes
being substantially the same—with only this difference, that for the
latter we have more ample materials—it was natural that they should
commence about the same time. Both are yet in their infancy. Neither
historians nor travellers in any former age, and few even in the
present, have had a glimmering of what it is to study a people.

We would not exaggerate the value of either of these sources of
knowledge. They are useful in aid of a more searching and accurate
experience, not in lieu of it. No one learns any thing very valuable
either from history or from travelling, who does not come prepared with
much that history and travelling can never teach. No one can know other
people so well as he may know himself, nor other ages and countries so
well as he may know his own age and country: and the wisdom acquired by
the study of ourselves, and of the circumstances which surround us, can
alone teach us to interpret the comparatively little which we know of
other persons and other modes of existence; to make a faithful picture
of them in our own minds, and to assign effects to their right causes.
Even to the philosopher, the value both of history and of travelling is
not so much positive as negative; they teach little, but they are a
protection against much error. Nations, as well as individuals, until
they have compared themselves with others, are apt to mistake their own
idiosyncracies for laws of our common being, and the accidents of their
position, for a part of the destiny of our race. The type of human
nature and of human life with which they are familiar, is the only one
which presents itself to their imagination; and their expectations and
endeavours continually presupposes, as an immutable law, something
which, perhaps, belongs only to the age and state of society through
which they are rapidly passing.

The correction of narrowness is the main benefit derived from the study
of various ages and nations: of narrowness, not only in our conceptions
of what is, but in our standard of what ought to be. The individualities
of nations Edition: current; Page: [94] are serviceable to the general
improvement, in the same manner as the individualities of persons: since
none is perfect, it is a beneficial arrangement that all are not
imperfect in the same way. Each nation, and the same nation in every
different age, exhibits a portion of mankind, under a set of influences,
different from what have been in operation anywhere else: each,
consequently, exemplifies a distinct phasis of humanity; in which the
elements which meet and temper one another in a perfect human character
are combined in a proportion more or less peculiar. If all nations
resembled any one nation, improvement would be apt to take place only
within the limits of the peculiar type of imperfection which that nation
would be sure to exhibit. But when each nation beholds in some other a
model of the excellencies corresponding to its own deficiencies; when
all are admonished of what they want, by what others have (as well as
made to feel the value of what they have by what others want), they no
longer go on confirming themselves in their defects by the consciousness
of their excellencies, but betake themselves, however tardily, to
profiting by each other’s example.

Omitting former ages, there are in the present age four great nations,
England, France, Germany, and the United States. Each of these
possesses, either in its social condition, in its national character, or
in both, some points of indisputable and pre-eminent superiority over
all the others. Each again has some deep-seated and grievous defects
from which the others are comparatively exempt. The state of society in
each, and the type of human nature which it exhibits, are subjects of
most instructive study to the others: and whoever, in the present age,
makes up his system of opinions from the contemplation of only one of
them, is in imminent danger of falling into narrow and one-sided views.

The tendency, therefore, now manifesting itself on the continent of
Europe, towards the philosophic study of past and of foreign
civilizations, is one of the encouraging features of the present time.
It is a tendency not wholly imperceptible even in this country, the most
insular of all the provinces of the republic of letters. In France and
Germany it has become a characteristic of the national intellect; and
such works as M. Guizot’s Lectures, reviewed in our present, and M. de
Tocqueville’s America, in our last Number, are among its results.[*]

The four nations which we have named, have all contributed their part
towards the collection of works on America, the titles of which stand
prefixed to the present article. They comprise the testimony of one
Frenchman, two Edition: current; Page: [95] Englishmen, and one German,
respecting the United States, and the reply of an American to the
hostile criticisms of another Englishman. All are interesting; and more
than one, of distinguished merit.

The first on the list is the most attractive to the general reader. The
author, M. Gustave de Beaumont, the friend and fellow-traveller of M. de
Tocqueville, has thrown his impressions of America into a form which
combines the authenticity of a book of travels with the attractions of a
well-conceived and well-executed work of fiction. Out of a few incidents
and characters, and those of the simplest description, he has
constructed, without affectation or straining, one of the most pathetic
stories of our time; which, as a mere novel, would have entitled the
author to no small literary reputation, but which is also a highly
impressive picture of American life; while the facts and remarks, which
are partly interspersed through it, and partly appended in the form of
notes and dissertations, superadd to its merits as a pictorial
delineation, the value of a formal treatise.

M. de Beaumont is no aristocrat, but a warm friend to the American
Government, and to popular institutions generally. Nevertheless, we have
read no book which has represented American social life in such sombre
colours, or which is more calculated to deter persons of
highly-cultivated faculties and lofty aspirations, from making that
country their abode. A part of this disagreeable impression is, no
doubt, a consequence of the melancholy colouring given by that
deplorable feature in American life on which the interest of the
fictitious narrative chiefly turns—the inhuman antipathy against the
negro race. The heroine of the story of Marie is a girl of colour—or at
least is reputed such, for the brand of degradation attaches not to
colour, but to pedigree. Undistinguishable by any outward mark from
women of purely European descent—the daughter of a man of weight and
consideration in the State to which he belongs—she grows up to womanhood
in ignorance of the defect in her genealogy, and with the feelings of a
highly-educated and sensitive girl. At this period, by the malice of an
enemy, it is bruited abroad, that, two or three generations before, a
drop of negro blood had mingled itself with that of one of her
ancestors, and had been transmitted to her. The remainder of the story
is occupied with the misery brought upon this unfortunate girl, upon her
brave and high-spirited brother, her father, and her lover, by the
effects of that direful prejudice, so lamentable that we hardly know how
to call it detestable.

Even independently of this dark spot in the character and destiny of the
Americans, M. de Beaumont’s representation of them is not flattering.
There is, however, a caution to be observed by an English reader, lest
he should draw from the terms in which M. de Beaumont expresses himself,
inferences never intended by the author. M. de Beaumont’s is a picture
of American life as it appears to a Frenchman. But to a Frenchman,
English life would, as Edition: current; Page: [96] to many of its
features, appear in a light very similar, and not much less
unfavourable. In many things which strike M. de Beaumont with the force
of novelty, and of which he speaks with strong, and possibly
well-grounded, dislike, an Englishman would see merely the peculiarities
of his own country and people a little heightened; but being probably
unaware of the degree in which things so familiar to him may appear
strange and repulsive to foreigners, he will be in danger of measuring
the divergence of America from the English standard, by the strong terms
in which M. de Beaumont expresses her distance from the French. The
picture thus mentally heightened would become a ridiculous caricature.
Even a work of a far higher order of philosophy than M. de Beaumont’s,
the Democracy in America of M. de Tocqueville, will be apt, if read
without this necessary caution, to convey a conception of America, in
many respects very wide of the truth.

In Mr. Abdy’s, still more than in M. de Beaumont’s book, the main topic
is the condition and treatment of the negro and mixed races; of whose
cause Mr. Abdy is an enthusiastic advocate, and of whose wrongs even M.
de Beaumont’s fiction scarcely gives so appalling a conception as Mr.
Abdy’s accumulation of facts. But into this painful subject, which is
almost wholly unconnected with any of the other features of society in
America, we shall at this time refrain from entering; and the more
willingly, as, in the present state of our knowledge, we are quite
unable either to suggest a remedy, or even to hazard a conjecture as to
the solution which fate has in reserve for that terrible problem.

Mr. Abdy, in respect of his political opinions, is an enlightened
Radical; and in respect of understanding and acquirements, appears a
very competent observer and witness, as to the state of things in
America. Few books of travels in that country, which have fallen under
our notice, have a greater number of useful and interesting facts and
observations scattered through them. The real and great interest,
however, in Mr. Abdy’s mind, is the condition of the coloured
population; and his sympathy with them gives him, in spite of his
radicalism, a decided bias against the Americans. The contrary is the
case with Mr. Latrobe. This gentleman seems, with respect to his native
country, England, to be a Tory, or at least a decided antireformer. But
we are acquainted with no traveller whose sentiments as to home politics
have less influenced his judgment or feelings respecting foreign
countries. Being, as he evidently is, of an amiable and highly sociable
disposition; meeting, like all other travellers, not merely with
hospitality, but with the most remarkable kindness and sociability
throughout the United States, and deriving the keenest enjoyment from
the sublime natural objects which he witnessed, and of which he has
furnished some of the most attractive descriptions we ever read; Mr.
Latrobe has seen all objects illuminated by his own feelings of
pleasure: and the impression which he communicates Edition: current;
Page: [97] of America and the Americans is highly favourable. In this
work, as in the others, we have found some judicious and valuable
remarks; but its greatest merit lies in its pictures of scenery, in
which department it ranks among the first productions of our day, and
may probably engage some further share of our attention in another
article.

Dr. Lieber’s work is the least valuable of the set. The author is a
German, permanently settled in the United States, where he has acquired,
we believe, a respectable position as a man of letters, and is the same
who has recently published, in this country, his Reminiscences of
Niebuhr the historian.[*] His book contains something about America,
with which he is in the highest good humour, and something about every
other subject whatsoever, especially about the author himself, of whose
adventures in the campaign of Waterloo we have a long, and it must be
admitted, interesting narrative, à propos of nothing at all. It is a
book of lively and rather clever gossip, which adds something, though
not much, to our knowledge of America; and has, for that reason, been
deemed worthy of a place at the head of this article.

Our list is closed by a paper reprinted in this country from the North
American Review, in which one of the most smooth-tongued of the
detractors of America, the author of Cyril Thornton, is gently, but most
effectually demolished.[†] The exposure of the incompetency and
presumption of the travelling Tory is complete. As to the subject
itself, the reviewer endeavours to make out, in behalf of his country,
more points than, judging from other authorities, we incline to think he
can succeed in; but he is well entitled to a hearing, and we eagerly
expect the judgment of the same writer on M. de Tocqueville, and on the
various authors reviewed in our present article.

For ourselves, we are less desirous of transferring to our pages (for
which, indeed, we have not room) a selection of the most interesting
passages from these various works, than of stating the opinion which,
from these and from all other sources of information, we have formed as
to the manner in which America has usually been judged.

Scarcely any one has looked at the United States with any other apparent
purpose than to find arguments for and against popular government.
America has been discussed, as if she were nothing but a democracy: a
society, differing from other human societies in no essential point,
except the popular character of her institutions. The friends or enemies
of parliamentary reform have been more or less in the habit of ascribing
to democracy whatever of Edition: current; Page: [98] good or evil they
have found or dreamed of in the United States. One class of writers,
indeed, the political economists, have taken notice of a second
circumstance, namely, that population in America does not press upon the
means of subsistence—and have traced the consequences of this as far as
high wages, but seldom further; while the rest of the world, if their
partialities happened to lie that way, have gone on ascribing even high
wages to the government; which we are informed is the prevalent opinion
among the Americans themselves, of all ranks and parties. But the
Government is only one of a dozen causes which have made America what
she is. The Americans are a democratic people: granted; but they are
also a people without poor; without rich; with a “far west” behind them;
so situated as to be in no danger of aggressions from without; sprung
mostly from the Puritans; speaking the language of a foreign country;
with no established church; with no endowments for the support of a
learned class; with boundless facilities to all classes for “raising
themselves in the world;” and where a large family is a fortune.

Without analysing minutely the effects of all these causes, let us
glance at some few of the numerous considerations which they suggest.

America, then, is a country in which there are no poor. This is not the
effect of the government. There are, indeed, governments in the world
which would make any people poor; but to such governments, a people as
civilized as the Americans never would submit. Where there is sufficient
protection of property, and sufficient freedom from arbitrary exaction,
to enable capital to accumulate with rapidity, and where population does
not increase still more rapidly, no one who is willing to work can
possibly be poor. Where there is no poverty, there will be a remarkable
freedom from the vices and crimes which are the consequences of it. It
is remarkable how much of those national characteristics which are
supposed to be peculiarly the result of democracy, flow directly from
the superior condition of the people—and would exist under any
government, provided the competition of employers for labourers were
greater than that of labourers for employment. The personal
independence, for example, of the labouring classes; their distaste for
menial occupations, and resolute taking of their own way in the manner
of performing them, contrasted with that absolute and blind obedience to
which European employers are accustomed: what are these but the result
of a state of the labour-market, in which to consent to serve another is
doing a sort of favour to him, and servants know that they, and not the
masters, can dictate the conditions of the contract?* The unpleasant
peculiarities which are complained of by travellers, in the manners of
the most numerous class in America, along with the substantial kindness
to which every traveller bears testimony, would be manifested by the
English peasantry if they were in the same circumstances—satisfied with
their condition, and therefore Edition: current; Page: [99] evincing the
degree of social feeling and mutual good will which a prosperous people
always exhibit; but freed from the necessity of servility for bread,
and, consequently, at liberty to treat their superiors exactly as they
treat one another.

If we add to this, that the original founders of the colonies, from whom
the present race of Americans are descended, were of the middle class,
were people who could read, and who valued reading as the means of being
instructed in their religion, we shall not wonder that this well-paid
people are also a reading people; and that this well-paid and reading
people are a democratic people. High wages and universal reading are the
two elements of democracy; where they co-exist, all government, except
the government of public opinion, is impossible. While the thirteen
states were dependent colonies of Great Britain, they were, as to
internal government, nearly as complete democracies as they now are; and
we know what was the consequence of attempting to impose burdens upon
them without their own consent.

But, secondly, there are not only no poor, there are scarcely any
rich—and no hereditary rich. Here again is a fact over which the
government has some indirect influence, but of which it cannot be
considered the cause. There are no laws to keep large fortunes together;
but neither are there laws, as in France, to divide them. If the rich
chose to leave all their property to their eldest sons, there is nothing
in the institutions of any of the states of America to prevent them; it
is only in case of intestacy that the law interferes, and in most of the
states effects an equal distribution. Public opinion seems to enjoin, in
most cases, equality of division; but it enforces its mandates only by a
moral sanction.*

Here, then, is a circumstance of immense influence on the civilization
of any country; an influence on which in our article on M. de
Tocqueville’s America we have enlarged, and which is further dwelt upon
in the first article of our present Number.[*] That important portion of
a people, who are its natural leaders in the higher paths of social
improvement—a leisured class, a class educated for leisure—is wanting in
America. It is not necessary, it is not even desirable, that this class
should possess enormous incomes. The Edition: current; Page: [100] class
exists largely in France and Germany, where the standard of incomes is
very low. But in America there is no class exempted from the necessity
of bestowing the best years of life on the acquisition of a subsistence.
To say nothing of the refinements and elegancies of social life—all
distinguished eminence in philosophy, and in the nobler kinds of
literature, is in a manner denied to America by this single
circumstance. There may, indeed, be writers by profession, and these may
drive a thriving trade; but, in no state of society ever known, could
the writings which were addressed to the highest order of minds, and
which were in advance of their age, have afforded a subsistence to their
authors. These have been produced by persons who had at least the means
of supporting life, independently of their literary labours; and even
the few works of a high order, which have been written in the intervals
of a life devoted to other business, have commonly been addressed to a
leisured class.*

We do not remember to have seen it noticed by any writer except the
author of England and America;[*] but it is a most significant fact,
that a large majority of all the Americans who are known out of their
own country, and five of her seven presidents, including Washington,
Jefferson, and Madison, were from the slave states. The reason is
manifest: there, and there alone, was there a leisured class.

To the absence of such a class must be added another circumstance, to
which due weight has scarcely yet been assigned—this is, that, to all
intents except government, the people of America are provincials.
Politically, the United States are a great and independent nation; but
in all matters social or literary, they are a province of the British
empire. This peculiarity of position, to which even their descent
contributes, is indissolubly fixed by the identity of language.

The characteristic of provincialism, in society and literature, is
imitation: provincials dare not be themselves; they dare do nothing for
which they have not, or think they have not, a warrant from the
metropolis. In regard to society, this remark is too hacknied to need
illustration. It is equally true in respect to literature. In the one,
as in the other, the provinces take their tone from the capital. It
rarely happens that a book has any success in the provinces, unless a
reputation acquired in the capital has preceded its arrival. But, in
regard to literature, Boston and New York are as much provincial cities
as Norwich or Liverpool, and much more so than Edinburgh (which Edition:
current; Page: [101] indeed is a kind of literary and social metropolis
in itself, and partakes but partially of the provincial character).
There has been a Franklin, and there has been a Burns: there will always
be persons of extraordinary genius, or extraordinary energy, capable of
making their way against one kind of obstacle as against another. But,
of the illustrious men of letters in France and England, though a
majority have been provincials by birth, nearly all have spent their
best years in the capital, and their works have been written in and for
London and Paris. The courage which has made them dare trust to their
own inspirations, either in thought or in language, as well as the
modesty which has saved them from (what stops the progress of most
aspirants in a very early stage) the misfortune of being too easily
pleased with their own performances—have been learned in the literary
metropolis of the nation, and in contact with the direct influence of
its leading minds.

Subtract from the British empire London and Edinburgh, and all or nearly
all who are born to independence; leave at the summit of this frustum of
the social pyramid the merchants of Liverpool, the manufacturers of
Manchester, the bar of London spread over the whole of England, and the
physicians, attorneys, and dissenting clergy: then raise the working
classes to the enjoyment of ample wages—give them universally the habit
of reading, and an active interest in public affairs; and you will have
a society constituted almost identically with that of the United States,
and the only standard with which this last can either be likened or
contrasted.* The present government of France has been called la
monarchie des épiciers; America is a republic peopled with a provincial
middle class.

The virtues of a middle class are those which conduce to getting
rich—integrity, economy, and enterprise—along with family affections,
inoffensive conduct between man and man, and a disposition to assist one
another, whenever no commercial rivalry intervenes. Of all these virtues
the Americans appear to possess a large share.† And the qualities of a
more questionable description, which there seems to be most ground for
ascribing to them, are the same which are seen to be characteristic of a
middle class in other countries: a general indifference to those kinds
of knowledge and mental culture which cannot be immediately converted
into pounds, shillings, and pence; very little perception or enjoyment
of the beautiful, either in nature or in the productions of genius,
along with great occasional affection of it; the predominant passion
that of money—the passion of those who have Edition: current; Page:
[102] no other; indifference to refinements and elegancies for their own
sake, but a vehement desire to possess what are accounted such by
others.

Another circumstance which has important consequences, both as to
society and national character, is the unrivalled industrial prosperity
of the United States. This circumstance enables the country to do with
less government than any other country in existence. It is easy to keep
the peace among a people all of whom are not only well off, but have
unlimited means of making themselves still better off without injury to
any one. The facilities of acquiring riches are such, that according to
M. de Tocqueville, that is the career which engrosses all the ambitious
spirits.[*] But this same industrial prosperity has some undesirable
effects. Both wages and profits being higher than in any other part of
the world, the temptation is strong to all classes (but especially to
those who, as managers of their own capital, can unite both sources of
emolument) to enter into life, as it is called, in other words, to
plunge into money-getting, at the earliest possible age. It is affirmed
that hardly any American remains at a place of general education beyond
the age of fifteen. Here again we recognise the habits and ways of
thinking of a middle class; the very causes which are accountable for
the comparative failure of the London University. Further, the chances
of rapid gain, combined with the facility of recovering after a fall,
offer a temptation to hazardous speculations greater than in any other
country. In Europe, a person who loses his all, falls into beggary; in
America, only into a condition from whence, in a few years, he may
emerge restored to affluence. A most adventurous spirit may, therefore,
be expected to prevail in the conduct of business. Not only does this
appear to be the fact, but the sympathy of the public generally with
that adventurous spirit, seems to produce extraordinary indulgence even
to its ill success. It is a remarkable circumstance, that although the
power is expressly reserved to Congress, of framing a general law of
bankruptcy for the United States, public opinion has never permitted any
such law to be enacted. The laws of some of the states are lenient to
excess towards even fraudulent bankruptcy;* and failures inflict no
discredit in the opinion of society. One cause of this indulgence
towards bankruptcies may be their extreme frequency. “A short time,”
says M. de Beaumont (Vol. I, pp. 284-6),

after my arrival in America, as I entered a salon, which contained the
élite of the society of one of the principal cities of the Union, a
Frenchman, long settled in the country, said to me, “Be sure to say
nothing disparaging of bankrupts.” I took his advice, very fortunately
as it happened: for, among all the rich personages to whom I was
presented, there was not one who had not failed once, or more Edition:
current; Page: [103] than once, before making his fortune. All Americans
being in business, and all having failed once or oftener, it follows
that to have been a bankrupt in the United States is nothing at all. The
indulgence towards bankruptcy comes, in the first place, from its being
the common case, but principally from the extreme facility with which
the insolvent can re-establish his fortunes. If he were ruined for ever,
he would perhaps be left to his fate; but mankind are more indulgent to
one who is in misfortune, when they know that he will not always be so

M. de Beaumont adds, with discriminating candour. “Because the Americans
are tolerant of bankruptcy, it does not follow that they approve of it.
Self-interest, observes Chateaubriand, is the greatest vice of the
Mussulmans,[*] and yet liberality is the virtue they hold in highest
esteem. In like manner, these traders, who continually violate their
engagements, applaud and honour good faith.”

It is, in fact, evident that in such bankruptcies the creditor has
nothing to complain of; as he loses by others, so others are in constant
danger of losing by him; and losses by bankruptcy are counted among the
ordinary risks of trade. The proof is, that notwithstanding the
frequency of failures, in no country is credit given more profusely and
readily. “The system of trading upon credit,” says Mr. Abdy (Vol. II, p.
130), “has been carried to a ruinous extent. The facility with which
bills are indorsed, and mutual accommodation procured, has exposed
commerce to reverses and expedients unknown in the old world; and the
tendency to erect mercantile enterprise on the basis of borrowing, is
such as to present the spectacle of a nation, composed in a great degree
of individuals who have mortgaged their bones and muscles to the
exigencies and speculations of the moment.”*

Another circumstance in American society has been noticed by almost all
travellers; and M. de Beaumont, Mr. Latrobe and Dr. Lieber bear strong
Edition: current; Page: [104] testimony to it:—the uninfluential
position of married women, their seclusion from society, and the
housemaid-like drudgery which appears to fill up their lives. There have
not been wanting persons who have seen, even in this, one of the
“degrading influences of democracy.” It is, however, an obvious
consequence of that state of the labour-market, which renders early
marriages and numerous families universal. Such a state of society
naturally produces what, by rather a pedantic use of the term, is called
regularity of morals; but when the boundlessness of the field of
employment, compared with the numbers to be employed, renders a large
family a fortune instead of a burden, women are likely, in their present
relation to men (and while in such matters they have as little of a will
of their own as everywhere, except in France, they seem to have), to be
little else than machines for bringing forth and nursing multitudes of
children. And it is evident, that where such is their destiny as wives,
and where they become wives almost before they are women, they are
likely to be sufficiently inferior in mental endowments, fully to
justify, in the eyes of men, the inferiority of their social position.*

Edition: current; Page: [105]
On looking back to the foregoing observations, some readers will perhaps
be surprised to find, that nearly all which has ever been complained of
as bad in America, and a great part of what is good, are accounted for
independently of democracy. This would have been still more obvious, if,
instead of confining our attention, as we have hitherto done, to the
northern and eastern states, we had extended it to the whole Union. So
far as the slave-states are concerned, it is a mere perversion of terms
to call the government a democracy. The entire white population of these
states are an aristocracy; and from all credible accounts, appear to
have a large share of all the personal qualities which belong everywhere
to those who rule by force, and are supported by the labour of others.*
Little could probably be traced among them of the influences either of
democracy or of any other of the general features of American society,
were it not for that incessant and rapid communication, which brings
into daily contact the inhabitants of all parts of the Union, and has
helped to produce throughout its whole extent a similarity of personal
character, not, indeed, so complete as is often supposed, but greater
than could have been produced by any other circumstance among so
diversified a population.

We have equally left out of our consideration the back-woods, and have
not thought it necessary to justify democracy from being in any way
accessary to “Lynch-law.” We have not forgotten Sir Robert Peel’s
Tamworth speech;[*] but (we must say) we think that speech chiefly
remarkable as a specimen of what the conservative baronet thought would
go down with his Tamworth auditory, or, we may perhaps add, with his
party. There are Tories enough, probably, who are ignorant of the
difference between the state of Mississippi and the state of New York;
but we much doubt his being one of them. Sir Robert Peel is not so
ignorant as to suppose, Edition: current; Page: [106] that any
government could establish good order and obedience to law, in countries
which count nearly as many square miles as inhabitants. He must have
read Mr. Crawford’s report;[*] from which he might have learnt that in
the back settlements not more than one crime in a hundred either is, or
possibly can be, made the subject of legal redress; and each person
consequently retains the right of self-defence which belongs to man in a
state of nature.* Least of all can Sir Robert Peel be sincere in laying
the blame upon democracy, of lawless proceedings which are exclusively
confined to the south-western states, where all the bad passions arising
from slavery, are blended with the vices natural to a country colonized
almost exclusively, as M. de Tocqueville says, by adventurers and
speculators.[†] Even Lynch-law, which, though it occasionally sanctions
its mandates by death, limits them in the first instance to removal from
the neighbourhood, is probably a real improvement upon the state of
society previously existing, in which every man’s rifle was his own
protector and avenger.

Nothing is farther from our intention than to say that the experience of
America throws no light upon principles of government, or that America
is not a proper theatre in which to study the tendencies of democracy.
Whoever has read our review of M. de Tocqueville’s book,[‡] knows that
we think the contrary. Democracy may be studied in America—but studied
it must be; its effects are not apparent on the mere surface of the
facts; a greater power of discriminating essentials from non-essentials
than travellers or politicians usually possess, is required for deducing
from the phenomena of American society inferences of any kind with
respect to democracy. The facts themselves must first be sifted, more
carefully than they ever are by any but a most highly-qualified
observer. Next, we have to strike off all such of the facts as, from the
laws of human nature, democracy can have nothing to do with, and all
those which are sufficiently accounted for by other causes. Edition:
current; Page: [107] The residuum alone can, by even a plausible
conjecture, be traced home to democracy.

One truth, at least, we think, sufficiently manifest. The Tory writers
have said, and said truly, that tranquillity and prosperity, in a
country placed in the peculiar physical circumstances of America, proves
little for the safety of democratic institutions among the crowded
population, the innumerable complications and causes of dissatisfaction,
which exist in older countries. Had they stopped there, every rational
person would have been of their opinion. But when they proceed to argue
as if the experiment of democracy had been tried in America under
circumstances wholly favourable, they are totally mistaken. America is,
in many important points, nearly the most unfavourable field in which
democracy could have been tried. With regard, indeed, to the vulgar
apprehensions which haunt vulgar minds, of agrarian laws, and schemes of
sweeping confiscation, the circumstances of the experiment are
undoubtedly as favourable as could be desired. But these are the fears
only of those to whom omne ignotum is terrible. In everything which
concerns the influences of democracy on intellect and social life, its
virtues could nowhere be put upon a harder trial than in America; for no
civilized country is placed in circumstances tending more to produce
mediocrity in the one, or dullness and inelegance in the other.
Everything in the position of America tends to foster the spirit of
trade, the passion of money-getting, and that almost alone.

We should not wonder if it were found that, in point of fact, the
Americans exhibit, not more, but less, of these undesirable
characteristics, than is the natural result of circumstances independent
of their government: and that, instead of evidence against democracy,
there is a balance to be set down in its favour, as an actual
counteractive of many of the unfavourable influences to which some other
circumstances in the position of America tend to subject her.

If so, unquestionably the condition of America must be regarded as
highly promising and hopeful: for, of all the circumstances in her
position which have appeared to us calculated to produce unfavourable
effects upon her national character, there is not one which has not a
tendency to disappear. Her greatest deficiency—the absence of a leisured
class—the mere progress of accumulation must be gradually supplying. If
indeed the deleterious influence in America were democracy, her case
would be hopeless, for that is an influence which must be strengthened,
and not weakened, by the natural course of events. But of every other
element of evil she will in time get rid. Accordingly there is valuable
testimony to the existence of a tendency to improvement in those very
points in which it seems to be most needed. The North American Review,
January, 1833, p. 47, a work attached to the federalist, not the
democratic party, says, “We rejoice to have it in our power Edition:
current; Page: [108] to assure the friends of liberty in England, that
they have nothing to fear for the charities and ornaments of life in the
progress of reform. Improvement was never in any country or age more
active, more visibly diffusing itself, than in the United States at this
time. Schools of all kinds are multiplying, sound learning in all its
branches is more and more cultivated, the polite arts are in a state of
creditable progress, and all these good influences are producing their
natural good effects.”[*]

The same Review, in the article on Colonel Hamilton’s Men and Manners in
America, contains the following passages, which it is but justice in us
to insert, having so recently extracted from M. de Tocqueville the
expression of opinions directly contrary on the points alluded to.
Future observers must decide which statement is nearest to the truth.

The devotion to literary—or to speak more generally—intellectual power,
that prevails in this country, is, in fact, one of the remarkable traits
in the national character, and is much more deep and fervent,—whatever
our author may think of it,—than that which is paid to wealth. Mere
wealth commands in this country,—as it must, and when tolerably well
administered, ought to command every where,—consideration and respect,
but creates no feeling of interest in its owner. Intellectual eminence,
especially when accompanied by high moral qualities, seems to operate
like a charm upon the hearts of the whole community. This effect is much
more perceptible here than in Europe, where the intellectual men are
overshadowed by an hereditary privileged class, who regard them every
where as inferior, and in some countries refuse to associate with them
at all. The highest professional or literary distinction gives no
admission to most of the courts of Europe, and only on a very unequal
footing to the fashionable circles. A lawyer or a clergyman of talent is
occasionally allowed a seat at the foot of a nobleman’s table, but to
aspire to the hand of his daughter would be the height of presumption.
At the close of a long life of labour he takes his seat, too late to
receive any great satisfaction from his new position, in the House of
Lords, as Chancellor, Chief-Justice, or Bishop. Through the whole active
period of his life he has moved, as a matter of course, in a secondary
sphere. With us, on the contrary, great wealth, the only accidental
circumstance that confers distinction, is commonly the result of a life
of labour. The intellectual men assume at once, and maintain through
life, a commanding position among their contemporaries,—give the tone in
the first social circles,—and, at the maturity of their powers and
influence, receive from their fellow-citizens demonstrations of
attachment and respect, which have rarely, if ever, been shown before to
the eminent men of any other country. The Presidentships and the
Governorships, the places in the cabinet, and on the bench of justice,
in Congress and in the State Legislatures,—the commissions in the Army
and Navy,—the foreign embassies,—elsewhere the monopoly of a few
privileged families,—are here the rewards of intellectual preeminence.
Lord Brougham, though certainly in every way one of the most illustrious
and truly deserving public characters that have appeared in England in
modern times, has never received from his countrymen any proof of
approbation half so flattering, Edition: current; Page: [109] as the
sort of civic triumph with which Mr. Clay and Mr. Webster were lately
welcomed on their respective visits to the East and the West Mr. Irving,
since his late return from Europe, has been the object of more attention
of a public kind, than was shown through the whole course of his life to
Sir Walter Scott, undoubtedly the most popular British writer of the
last century.

This respect for intellectual power, which forms so remarkable a feature
in the national character, ought not to have escaped the attention of a
traveller, whose pretensions to notice are founded entirely upon that
basis, and who had experienced the operation of it so favourably in his
own person. It has often been evinced, in a very pleasing way, in the
testimonials of regard shown to the memory of distinguished literary
men, even of foreign countries. At the late lamented decease of the
illustrious British poet just alluded to, the public feeling of regret
was evidently quite as strong in this country as in England.
Subscriptions were raised at New York, to aid in the purchase of
Abbotsford for his family; and a monument to his memory is now in
preparation at Albany. We regret to learn that the object, in which the
New York subscriptions were intended to aid, is not likely to be
effected. The marble tablet that covers the remains of Henry Kirke
White, in the churchyard of Nottingham in England, was placed there by a
gentleman of this city, no otherwise interested in his memory, than by
the pleasure he had taken in reading his poems.[*]

This view of the matter receives confirmation from the hostile testimony
of Colonel Hamilton himself. If the Americans are so vain of their
distinguished intellectual characters, as that gentleman affirms, most
assuredly they must be anything but indifferent to the value of
intellect itself.

On the capacity and disposition of the people to make a good selection
of persons to fill the highest offices, the American reviewer, though
attached to what is esteemed the aristocratic party, is so far from
agreeing with M. de Tocqueville, that he considers the experience of his
country to be not only favourable, but decisively so.

So far as the office of President of the United States is concerned,
which our author appears to have had particularly in view, we had
supposed it to be generally acknowledged, not that the experiment had
failed, but that it had succeeded a good deal better than perhaps could
reasonably have been expected. Of the seven Presidents who have been
elected under it, the six first, viz. Washington, the two Adamses,
Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe,—though certainly far from being on a
level in point of qualifications for the office,—were all, by general
acknowledgment, among the most eminent and best qualified persons in the
country. Mr. Monroe, the least conspicuous of the number, is yet spoken
of by our author, deservedly, in very handsome terms, and was as much
superior to the hereditary rulers of the ordinary European standard, as
Washington was to him. As to the qualifications of the present
incumbent, which are still the subject of party controversy, there would
no doubt be a difference of opinion. A large and respectable portion of
the citizens who opposed his election would probably say, that in his
case, the system has in fact failed. But were this even admitted, it
might Edition: current; Page: [110] still be pertinently asked, whether
any system can be expected to produce the best possible results oftener
than six times out of seven. On the other hand, the large majority of
the citizens who elected General Jackson look upon him as the very
Phœnix of Presidents, and from the tone of our author’s remarks upon the
subject, we should have supposed that he inclined to this opinion. He
certainly, if his account may be believed, “retired from the interview
he had with General Jackson, with sentiments of very sincere respect for
the intellectual and moral qualities of the American President.” We
doubt whether he could have said as much as this of a majority of the
hereditary rulers of Europe. Add to this, that in the innumerable
instances in which the same system has been applied in the several
States, it has brought out, almost uniformly, men of great
respectability,—often the very first men in the country, such as
Jefferson, Dewitt Clinton, and Jay,—and in no one case, as far as we are
informed, any person notoriously incapable. We cannot but think, that
instead of having grossly failed, it must be regarded, on the whole, as
having in a remarkable manner succeeded. In fact, the capacity of the
people at large to elect the principal political functionaries, is
considered, by competent judges, as one of the least questionable points
in the theory of government. Montesquieu, at least as high an authority
on a political question as the author of Cyril Thornton, tells us that
“the people are admirably well qualified to elect those who are to be
intrusted with any portion of their power. If there were a doubt of
this, we need only to recollect the continual succession of astonishing
elections that were made by the Athenians and the Romans, which
certainly cannot be attributed to chance.”[*] The history of the United
States, so far as we have proceeded, will be regarded by future
political philosophers, as furnishing another example, not less striking
than those of Athens and Rome.[†]

There are two or three obvious mistakes in this reasoning. Athens and
Rome were not democracies, but altogether, and exclusively, governments
by a leisured class: their experience, therefore, though it throws light
upon many of the effects of free institutions in general, cannot be
quoted as evidence on the subject of democracy. The Presidents of
America, too, should have been contrasted, not with the hereditary kings
of the various countries of Europe, who generally have little to do in
the government of those countries, but with the prime ministers. That
comparison, however, is anything but unfavourable to America; and the
reviewer is warranted in his triumphant appeal to the distinguished
merit of the seven Presidents who have been elected by the people of the
United States.

A question to which we should be more anxious to have the reviewer’s
answer, would be, why the Washingtons and Jeffersons have left no
successors? Why, in an age so far superior in intellectual facilities
and resources to that in which those eminent men were educated, the man
whom common opinion even now apparently places at the head of the public
men of the Edition: current; Page: [111] United States, is the survivor
of President Jefferson’s cabinet, Mr. Albert Gallatin?*

We are the more desirous to have this question answered by the reviewer,
as we can ourselves suggest an answer for his consideration. The great
men alluded to were sprung from a leisured class. The families which
gave birth to Washington and Jefferson, and, we believe, to Madison and
Monroe, belonged to a class of proprietors maintained by the labour of
slaves, and enjoying hereditary landed possessions in the then
flourishing and opulent state of Virginia. From causes not
satisfactorily explained in any of the works before us, but which are
apparently connected with vicissitudes of cultivation and markets, the
prosperity of that state has greatly declined, and nearly the whole of
these families are bankrupt.† We are much mistaken if this be not part
of the solution of the mystery. The stream has ceased to flow, because
its fountain is dried up. Why a corresponding number of examples of like
excellence have not been produced in the other slave states we cannot
pretend to say. Were we perfectly versed in the history and local
circumstances of those states, the fact might admit of explanation. We
do not affirm that wherever there is a leisured class there will be high
mental culture. But we contend that the existence of such a class is a
necessary condition of it.

As to the general standard of mental cultivation and acquirements in the
United States, the testimony of all travellers confirms the assertion of
M. de Tocqueville, that a certain “niveau mitoyen” has established
itself, which few either fall below or soar above.[*] “It is probable,”
says Mr. Abdy, (Vol. I, p. 13.) “that the average of literary
accomplishments is higher among our brethren in the new world, than
among ourselves, while the extremes at either end are less distant from
the middle point of the scale.” “The instruction given to children,”
says M. de Beaumont,

is purely practical; it does not aim at the cultivation of the higher
moral and intellectual faculties, but seeks only to form men fitted for
the business of social life: all are able to speak and write, but
without talent, though not without pretension. . . . That purely
intellectual existence which withdraws from the trivialities of outward
life, and feeds upon ideas—for which meditation is a want, science a
duty, Edition: current; Page: [112] and literary creation a delightful
enjoyment—is unknown in America. That country is ignorant of the very
existence of the modest man of science, who keeping aloof from political
life and the struggle to rise, devotes himself to study, loving it for
its own sake, and enjoys, in silence, its honourable leisure. . . .
Europeans, who admire Cooper, fancy that the Americans must adore him;
but the fact is not so. The Walter Scott of America finds in his own
country neither fortune nor renown. He earns less by his writings than a
dealer in stuffs; the latter therefore is a greater man than the dealer
in ideas. This reasoning is unanswerable.

(Vol. I, pp. 252-3, 261-3.)

There is one topic on which we desire to say a few words, particularly
as it is one on which the testimony of travellers is not uniform—the
inordinate national vanity of which the Americans are accused, and their
imputed excess of sensitiveness to criticism. On these points the
testimony of M. de Tocqueville, M. de Beaumont, and Mr. Abdy, is
extremely unfavourable. They all agree in representing the mass of
Americans as not only offended by any disparagement of their country,
even in the most unessential particular, but dissatisfied with any
moderate praise; and as nourishing the most extravagant ideas of the
superiority of their country over all others. All these authors agree
also in ascribing this national weakness to the fulsome flattery heaped
on the nation en masse by nearly all their politicians and writers:
flattery, of which Mr. Abdy (who excels almost any traveller we remember
in the abundance of specific facts with which he usually substantiates
his general observations) produces a number of very ludicrous instances.

Mr. Latrobe does not appear to have seen these peculiarities (except,
indeed, the sensitiveness) in quite so strong a light. The North
American Review altogether denies them. “We aver upon our consciences,”
says the reviewer of Mrs. Trollope,[*]

that we do not remember an occasion on which a good-natured joke, from
any quarter, on any part of America, has been taken amiss. By whom has
Mr. Irving’s Knickerbocker,[†] two entire volumes of satire on the Dutch
of New York, been more keenly relished than by his countrymen; and where
is Mr. Hacket more warmly greeted than at Boston? But we go farther than
this. Not only has no offence, that we know of, been taken at well-meant
pleasantry, but that which was not well-meant, the ribaldry, the
exaggerations, the falsehoods of the score of tourists in this country,
who have published their journals, seasoned to the taste for detraction
prevailing in England, [among the English aristocracy, he should have
said,] and in order to find reimbursement in the sale for the expense of
the tour; we say the abuse of this race of travellers has never, that we
recollect, in itself, moved the ire of the public press in this country.
Not one of these travellers has been noticed, till his libels had been
endorsed by the Quarterly, and, we are Edition: current; Page: [113]
grieved to add, sometimes by the Edinburgh Review, or by some other
responsible authority. Then, when the leading journals in Europe had
done their best to authenticate the slander, we have thought it
sometimes deserving refutation.

([Edward Everett, “Prince Pückler Muscau and Mrs. Trollope,”] North
American Review for January, 1833, p. 42.)

Dr. Lieber is of the same opinion.

You may little expect to hear an assertion of this kind, after having
read so many charges to the contrary; yet I must be permitted to state,
that I consider the Americans eminently good-natured, and disposed to
allow any one to speak with perfect freedom of America and her
institutions. Of such a thing as taking amiss, as it is termed, they
hardly know. That those of them who have seen little of the world are
often conceited in regard to their country is natural; every villager,
all over the world, thinks his steeple the highest, and assures you that
the bottom of his pond has never been found yet. But even such as these
among the Americans will allow you freely to make your remarks upon
their country, laugh heartily with you, and never get angry on account
of your free remarks. I have found this so constantly, and in so
striking instances, that I do not hesitate to state it as a fact. If a
man in the west asks you, “How do you like our country?” or a Bostonian.
“Don’t you think, after all, our climate very fine?” you must not forget
that, perhaps, the remark is made from a kind disposition, and that, in
this, as in all similar cases, it is but one that bothers you, while a
hundred others remain silent, and you remember only the one who may have
troubled you, if you are so sensitive as to call this troubling. It is
certainly a fact worth notice, that the severest books against the
United States sell rapidly, and often run through several editions: and
when I once conversed with one of the first publishers as to a work on
the United States, he said, “Any one who writes on this country ought to
know, that the severer he is, the better his book will sell. I am
convinced of this fact by repeated experience.”* Which is no encouraging
prospect for all those who wish to say what they think and know, that
eagles soar high, and geese cackle loud all over the world.

That this good-natured equanimity of the Americans may be somewhat
disturbed when a gentleman travels tout le temps en maître d’école, all
the time pronouncing his opinion ex cathedrâ, finding fault and
ridiculing, might be supposed; though I have, even then, seen the
Americans, almost without exception, pertinaciously good-natured.

(Vol. II, pp. 77-9.)

This is the testimony of a trustworthy witness, who, during a far longer
residence in the country than that of Mr. Abdy, or MM de Tocqueville and
de Beaumont, has enjoyed ample opportunities of observation. The
discrepancy may be easily reconciled. It is but natural to suppose that
the Americans, like all other people, will bear more from one person
than from another; and that so warm an admirer as Dr. Lieber may have
met with a more good-humoured Edition: current; Page: [114] reception
for his small criticisms, than is given to the strictures of men who,
like the other three gentlemen, have opinions which place them at direct
variance with some of the strongest prejudices and most prominent
characteristics of the American people.

As for their inordinate conceit of the superiority of their country, all
the nations of Europe had the like, until they began to know one
another; and the cure for it, in America as elsewhere, is greater
intercourse with foreigners. Nor must it be forgotten that, to a
stranger, both the conceit and the sensitiveness to criticism are likely
to appear greater than they are. He sees the Americans in their
awkwardest aspect—when they are attempting to do the honours of their
country to a foreigner. They are not at their ease with him. They have
the feelings as a nation, which we usually see in an individual whose
position in society is not fixed. Their place in the estimation of the
civilized world is not yet settled. They have but recently come to their
importance, and they cannot yet afford to despise affronts. On this
subject the liberal remarks of Mr. Latrobe deserve attention. He says,
(Vol. I, p. 68.)—

The English have not, as a nation, whatever may be supposed by those who
gather their estimate of national feeling from the Reviews, much
sympathy with this kind of sensitiveness. We have arrived at that happy
pitch of national self-esteem, and our national pride is so little
disturbed by unwelcome surmises or suspicions that in this or that
particular we are really emulated or surpassed by our neighbours, that
we calmly set down any one who comes amongst us, and tells us that, in
certain matters. John Bull is surpassed by other nations, or an object
of ridicule to them, as an ignorant or spiteful twaddler at once, and do
not suffer the national temper to be ruffled. Having now, for so many
years, been accustomed to have justice done to us by our neighbours on
all main points, however unwillingly, we can even afford to be
satirized, or, as we would say, caricatured in some minor particulars,
and can magnanimously laugh at the same. But not so with America. She
feels, and with reason, that justice has not always been done her in
essentials, and by Britain in particular. She knows that there has been
a spirit abroad having a tendency to keep the truth and her real praise
away from the eye of the world, shrouded behind a vein of coarse
ribaldry, and detail of vulgarities which, if not positively untrue,
were at least so invidiously chosen, and so confirmatory of prejudice,
and so far caricature, when applied to the people as a mass, as almost
to bear the stigma of untruth. She has felt that the progress made in a
very limited period of time, and amidst many disadvantages, in
reclaiming an immense continent from the wilderness, in covering it with
innumerable flourishing settlements; her success in the mechanic arts;
her noble institutions in aid of charitable purposes; the public spirit
of her citizens; their gigantic undertakings to facilitate interior
communication; their growing commerce in every quarter of the globe; the
indomitable perseverance of her sons; the general attention to
education, and the reverence for religion, wherever the population has
become permanently fixed; and the generally mild and successful
operation of their government, have been overlooked, or only casually
mentioned: while the failings, rawness of character, and ill-harmonised
state of society in many parts; the acts of lawless individuals, and the
slang and language of the vulgar, Edition: current; Page: [115] have
been held prominently forward to excite scorn, provoke satire, and
strengthen prejudice. In short, she has felt that her true claims upon
respect and admiration have been either unknown or undervalued in
Europe; and that especially that nation with whom she had the greatest
national affinity, was inclined to be the most perseveringly
unjust.—Hence partly arises, it may be surmised, the querulous state of
sensitiveness, to which allusion has been made, and also that
disposition to swagger and exaggerate, which has been laid to the charge
of many Americans, not without reason.

It must be said, to the honour of the Quarterly Review, that these and
similar remarks of Mr. Latrobe have extorted from that journal (or
perhaps only afforded it an opportunity for) an acknowledgment of error,
accompanied with expressions of regret for the tone of former
articles;[*] an example of candour which, though it does not cancel the
turpitude of the previous offence, is highly laudable, and almost new in
the morality of the periodical press.

Edition: current; Page: [116] Edition: current; Page: [117]


CIVILIZATION
 1836

Edition: current; Page: [118]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Dissertations and Discussions, I (2nd ed., 1867), 160-205, where the
title is footnoted, “London and Westminster Review, April 1836.”
Reprinted from L&WR, III & XXV (April, 1836), 1-28, where it is headed,
“Art. I. / Civilization,” and has right running title “Civilization” and
left running title “Signs of the Times.” Signed “A.” Original article
identified in JSM’s bibliography as “An article entitled
‘Civilization—Signs of the Times’ in the London and Westminster Review
for April, (No 5 and 48.)” (MacMinn, 47.) No corrections or emendations
in the copy in the Somerville College Library.

For comment on the essay, see the Textual Introduction, lxxiv-lxxvi
above.

The following text, taken from the 2nd ed. of D&D (the last in JSM’s
lifetime) is collated with that in D&D, 1st ed. (London: Parker, 1859),
and that in L&WR. In the footnoted variants, “67” indicates D&D, 2nd
ed.; “59” indicates D&D, 1st ed.; “36” indicates L&WR.

Edition: current; Page: [119]


Civilization

The word civilization, like many other terms of the philosophy of human
nature, is a word of double meaning. It sometimes stands for ahuman
improvementa in general, and sometimes for bcertain kindsb of
improvement in particular.

We are accustomed to call a country more civilized if we think it more
improved; more eminent in the best characteristics of Man and Society;
cfartherc advanced in the road to perfection; happier, nobler, wiser.
This is one sense of the word civilization. But in another sense it
stands for that kind of improvement only, which distinguishes a wealthy
and dpowerfuld nation from savages or barbarians. It is in this sense
that we may speak of the vices or the miseries of civilization, and that
the question has been seriously propounded, whether civilization is on
the whole a good or an evil? Assuredly, we entertain no doubt on this
point, we hold that civilization is a good, that it is the cause of much
good, ande not incompatible with any, but we think there is other good,
much even of the highest good, which civilization in this sense does not
provide for, and some which it has a tendency (though that tendency may
be counteracted) to impede.

The inquiry into which these considerations would leadf, is calculated
to throw light upon many of the characteristic features of our time. The
present era is pre-eminently the era of civilization in the narrow
sense; whether we consider what has already been achieved, or the rapid
advances making towards still greater achievements. We do not regard the
age as either equally advanced or equally progressive in many of the
other kinds of improvement. In some it appears to us stationary, in some
even retrograde. Moreover,g the irresistible consequences of a state of
advancing civilization; the new position in which that advance has
placed, and is every day more and more placing, mankind, the entire
inapplicability of old rules to this new position, and the necessity, if
we would either realize the benefits of the new state or preserve those
of the old, that we should adopt many new rules, and new courses of
Edition: current; Page: [120] action; are topics which seem to require a
more comprehensive examination than they have usually received.

We shall hon the present occasionh use the word civilization ionly in
the restrictedi sense: not that in which it is synonymous with
improvement, but that in which it is the direct converse or contrary of
rudeness or barbarism. Whatever be the characteristics of what we call
savage life, the contrary of these, orj the qualities which society puts
on as it throws off these, constitute civilization. Thus, a savage tribe
consists of a handful of individuals, wandering or thinly scattered over
a vast tract of country: a dense population, therefore, dwelling in
fixed habitations, and largely collected together in towns and villages,
we term civilized. In savage life there is no commerce, no manufactures,
no agriculture, or next to none: a country rich in the fruits of
agriculture, commerce, and manufactures, we call civilized. In savage
communities each person shifts for himself; except in war (and even then
very imperfectly), we seldom see any joint operations carried on by the
union of many; nor do savagesk, in general,k find much pleasure in each
other’s society. Wherever, therefore, we find human beings acting
together for common purposes in large bodies, and enjoying the pleasures
of social intercourse, we term them civilized. In savage life there is
little or no law, or administration of justice; no systematic employment
of the collective strength of society, to protect individuals against
injury from one another; every one trusts to his own strength or
cunning, and where that fails, he is lgenerallyl without resource. We
accordingly call a people civilized, where the arrangements of society,
for protecting the persons and property of its members, are sufficiently
perfect to maintain peace among them; i.e. to induce the bulk of the
community to rely for their security mainly uponm social arrangements,
and renounce for the most part, and in ordinary circumstances, the
vindication of their interests (whether in the way of aggression or of
defence) by their individual strength or courage.

These ingredients of civilization are various, but consideration will
satisfy us that they are not improperly classed together. History, and
their own nature, alike show that they begin together, always co-exist,
and accompany each other in their growth. Wherever there has narisenn
sufficient knowledge of the arts of life, and sufficient security of
property and person, to render the progressive increase of wealth and
population possible, the community becomes and continues progressive in
all the elements which we have just enumerated. oTheseo elements exist
in modern Europe, and especially in Edition: current; Page: [121] Great
Britain, in a more eminent degree, and in a state of more rapid
progression, than at any other place or time. We ppropose to considerp
some of the consequences which that high and progressive state of
civilization has already produced, and of the further ones which it is
hastening to produce.

The most remarkable of those consequences of advancing civilization,
which the state of the world is now forcing upon the attention of
thinking minds, is this: that power passes more and more from
individuals, and small knots of individuals, to masses: that the
importance of the masses becomes constantly greater, that of individuals
less.

The causes, evidences, and consequences of this law of human affairs,
well deserve attention.

There are two elements of importance and influence among mankind: the
one is, property; the other, powers and acquirements of mind. Both of
these, in an early stage of civilization, are confined to a few persons.
In the beginnings of society, the power of the masses does not exist;
because property and intelligence have no existence beyond a very small
portion of the community, and even if they had, those who possessed the
smaller portions would be, from their incapacity of co-operation, unable
to cope with those who possessed the larger.

qIn the more backward countries of the present time, and in all Europe
at no distant date, we see property entirely concentrated in a small
number of hands; the remainder of the people being, with few exceptions,
either the military retainers and dependents of the possessors of
property, or serfs, stripped and tortured at pleasure by one master, and
pillaged by a hundred. At no period could it be said that there was
literally no middle class—but that class was extremely feeble, both in
numbers and in power: while the labouring people, absorbed in manual
toil, with difficulty earned, by the utmost excess of exertion, a more
or less scanty and always precarious subsistence. The character of this
state of society was the utmost excess of poverty and impotence in the
masses; the most enormous importance and uncontrollable power of a small
number of individuals, each of whom, within his own sphere, knew neither
law nor superior.

We must leave to history to unfold the gradual rise of the trading and
manufacturing classes, the gradual emancipation of the agricultural, the
tumults and bouleversements which accompanied these changes in their
course, and the extraordinary alterations in institutions, opinions,
habits, and the whole of social life, which they brought in their train.
We need only ask the reader to form a conceptionr of all that is implied
in the words, growth of a middle class; and then stos reflect on the
immense increase of Edition: current; Page: [122] the numbers and
property of that class throughout Great Britain, France, Germany, and
other countries, in every successive generation, and the novelty of a
labouring class receiving such wages as are now commonly earned by
nearly the whole of the manufacturing, that is, of the most numerous
portion of the operative classes of this country—and ask himself
whether, from causes so unheard-of, unheard-of effects ought not to be
expected to flow. It must at least be evident, that if, as civilization
advances, property and intelligence become thus widely diffused among
the millions, it must also be an effect of civilization, that the
portion of either of these which can belong to an individual must have a
tendency to become less and less influential, and all results must more
and more be decided by the movements of masses; provided that the power
of combination among the masses keeps pace with the progress of their
resources. And that it does so, who can doubt? There is not a more
accurate test of the progress of civilization than the progress of the
power of co-operation.

tConsidert the savage: he has bodily strength, he has courage,
enterprise, and is often not without intelligence; what makes all savage
communities poor and feeble? The same cause which prevented the lions
and tigers from long ago extirpating the race of men—incapacity of
co-operation. It is only civilized beings who can combine. All
combination is compromise: it is the sacrifice of some portion of
individual will, for a common purpose. The savage cannot bear to
sacrifice, for any purpose, the satisfaction of his individual will. His
usocial cannot even temporarily prevail over his selfish feelings, nor
his impulsesu bend to his calculations. Look again at the slave: he is
used indeed to make his will give way; but to the commands of a master,
not to a superior purpose of his own. He is wanting in intelligence to
form such a purpose; above all, he cannot frame to himself the
conception of a fixed rule: nor if he could, has he the capacity to
adhere to it; he is habituated to control, but not to self-control; when
a driver is not standing over him with a vwhipv, he is found more
incapable of withstanding any temptation, or wrestrainingw any
inclination, than the savage himself.

We have taken extreme cases, that the fact we seek to illustrate might
stand out more conspicuously. But the remark itself applies universally.
As any people approach to the condition of savages or of slaves, so are
they incapable of acting in concert. xConsider evenx war, the most
serious business of a barbarous people; see what a figure rude nations,
or semi-civilized and enslaved nations, have made against civilized
ones, from Marathon downwards. Why? Because discipline is more powerful
than numbers, and discipline, that is, perfect co-operation, is an
attribute of civilization. To come to Edition: current; Page: [123] our
own times, ythe whole history of the Peninsular War bears witness to the
incapacity of an imperfectly civilized people fory co-operation. Amidst
all the enthusiasm of the Spanish znationz struggling against Napoleon,
no one leader, military or political, could act in concert with another;
no one would sacrifice one iota of his consequence, his authority, or
his opinion, to the most obvious demands of the common cause; neither
generals nor soldiers could observe the simplest rules of the military
art. If there be an interest which one might expect to act forcibly upon
the minds even of savages, it is the desire of simultaneously crushing a
formidable neighbour whom none of them are strong enough to resist
single-handed; yet none but civilized nations have ever been capable of
forming an alliance. The native states of India have been conquered by
the English one by one; Turkey made peace with Russia in the very moment
of her invasion by France; the nations of the world never could form a
confederacy against the Romans, but were swallowed up in succession,
some of them being always ready to aid in the subjugation of the rest.
Enterprises requiring the voluntary co-operation of many persons
independent of one another, in the hands of all but highly civilized
nations, have always failed.

It is not difficult to see why this incapacity of organized combination
characterizes savages, and disappears with the growth of civilization.
Co-operation, like other difficult things, can be learnt only by
practice: and to be capable of it in great things, a people must be
gradually trained to it in small. Now, the whole course of advancing
civilization is a series of such training. The labourer in a rude state
of society works singly, or if several are brought to work together by
the will of a master, they work side by side, but not in concert; one
man digs his piece of ground, another digs a similar piece of ground
close by him. In the situation of an ignorant labourer, tilling even his
own field with his own ahandsa, and bassociating withb no one except his
wife and his children, what is there that can teach him to co-operate?
The division of employments—the accomplishment by the combined labour of
several, of tasks which could not be achieved by any number of persons
singly—is the great school of co-operation. What a lesson, for instance,
is navigation, as soon as it passes out of its first simple stage; the
safety of all, constantly depending upon the vigilant performance by
each, of the part peculiarly allotted to him in the common task.
Military operations, when not wholly undisciplined, are a similar
school; so are all the operations of commerce and manufactures which
require the employment of many hands upon Edition: current; Page: [124]
the same thing at the same time. By these operations, mankind learn the
value of combination; they see how much and with what ease it
accomplishes, which never could be accomplished without it; they learn a
practical lesson of submitting themselves to guidance, and subduing
themselves to act as interdependent parts of a complex whole. A people
thus progressively trained to combination by the business of their
lives, become capable of carrying the same habits into new things. For
it holds universally, that the one only mode of learning to do anything,
is actually doing something of the same kind under easier circumstances.
Habits of discipline once acquired, qualify human beings to accomplish
all other things for which discipline is needed. No longer either
spurning control, orc incapable of seeing its advantages; whenever any
object presents itself which can be attained by co-operation, and which
they see or believe to be beneficial, they are ripe for attaining it.

The characters, then, of a state of high civilization being the
diffusion of property and intelligence, and the power of co-operation;
the next thing to observe is the dunexampledd development which all
these elements have assumed of late years.

The rapidity with which property has accumulated and is accumulating in
the principal countries of Europe, but especially in this island, is
obvious to every one. The capital of the industrious classes overflows
into foreign countries, and into all kinds of wild speculations. The
amount of capital annually exported from Great Britain alone, surpasses
probably the whole wealth of the most flourishing commercial republics
of antiquity. But ethise capital, collectively so vast, is fmainly
composedf of small portions; very generally so small that the owners
cannot, without other means of livelihood, subsist on the profits of
them. While such is the growth of property in the hands of the mass, the
circumstances of the higher classes have undergone nothing like a
corresponding improvement. Many large fortunes have, it is true, been
accumulated, but many others have been wholly or partially dissipated;
for the inheritors of immense fortunes, as a class, always live at least
up to their incomes when at the highest, and the unavoidable
vicissitudes of those incomes are always sinking them deeper and deeper
into debt. gA large proportion of theg English landlords, as they
themselves are constantly telling us, are hso overwhelmed with
mortgages, that they have ceased to be the real owners of the bulk of
their estatesh. In other countries the large properties have very
generally been broken down; in France, by revolution, Edition: current;
Page: [125] and the revolutionary law of inheritance; in Prussia, by
successive edicts of that substantially democratic, though iformallyi
absolute government.

With respect to knowledge and intelligence, it is the truism of the age,
that the masses, both of the middle and even of the working classes, are
treading upon the heels of their superiors.

If we now consider the progress made by those same masses in the
capacity and habit of co-operation, we find it equally surprising. At
what period were the operations of productive industry carried on upon
anything like their present scale? Were so many hands ever before
employed at the same time upon the same work, as now in all the
principal departments of manufactures and commerce? To how enormous an
extent is business now carried on by joint-stock companies—in other
words, by many small capitals thrown together to form one great one. The
country is covered with associations. There are societies for political,
societies for religious, societies for philanthropic purposes. But the
greatest novelty of all is the spirit of combination which has jgrown
upj among the working classes. The present age has seen the commencement
of benefit societies, and they now, as well as the more questionable
Trades Unions, overspread the whole country. A more powerful, though not
so ostensible, instrument of combination than any of these, has but
lately become universally accessible—the newspaper. The newspaper
carries khome the voice of the manyk to every individual among them; by
the newspaper each learns thatl others are feeling as he feels, and that
if he is ready, he will find them also prepared to act upon what they
feel. The newspaper is the telegraph which carries the signal throughout
the country, and the flag round which it rallies. Hundreds of newspapers
speaking in the same voice at once, and the rapidity of communication
afforded by improved means of locomotion, were what enabled the whole
country to combine in that simultaneous energetic demonstration of
determined will which carried the Reform Act. Both these facilities are
on the increase, every one may see how rapidly; and they will enable the
people on all decisive occasions to form a collective will, and render
that collective will irresistible.

To meet this wonderful development of physical and mmentalm power on the
part of the masses, can it be said that there has been any corresponding
quantity of intellectual power or moral energy unfolded among those
individuals or classes who have enjoyed superior advantages? No one, we
think, will affirm it. There is a great increase of humanity, a decline
of bigotry, nas well as of arrogance and the conceit of casten, among
our conspicuous classes, Edition: current; Page: [126] but there is, to
say the least, no increase of shining ability, and a very marked
decrease of vigour and energy. With all the advantages of this age, its
facilities for mental cultivation, the incitements ando rewards which it
holds out to exalted talents, there can scarcely be pointed out in the
European annals any stirring times which have brought so little that is
distinguished, either morally or intellectually, to the surface.

That this, too, is no more than was to be expected from the tendencies
of civilization, when no attempt is made to correct them, we shall have
occasion to show presently. But even if civilization did nothing to
lower the eminences, it would produce an exactly similar effect by
raising the plains. When the masses become powerful, an individual, or a
small band of individuals, can paccomplish nothing considerablep except
by influencing the masses; and to do this becomes daily more difficult,q
from the constantly increasing number of those who are vying with one
another to attract the public attention. Our position, therefore, is
established, that by the natural growth of civilization, power passes
from individuals to masses, and the weight and importance of an
individual, as compared with the mass, sink into greater and greater
insignificance.

The change which is thus in progress, and to a great extent consummated,
is the greatest ever recorded in rsocialr affairs; the most complete,
the most fruitful in consequences, and the most irrevocable. Whoever can
meditate on it, and not see that so great a revolution vitiates all
existing rules of government and policy, and renders all practice and
all predictions grounded only on prior experience worthless, is wanting
in the very first and most elementary principle of statesmanship in
these times.

“Il faut,” as M. de Tocqueville has said, “une science politique
nouvelle à un monde tout nouveau.”[*] The whole face of society is
reversed—all the natural elements of power have definitively changed
places, and there are people who talks of standing up for ancient
institutions, and the duty of sticking to the British Constitution
settled in 1688! What is still more extraordinary, these are the people
who accuse others of disregarding variety of circumstances, and imposing
their abstract theories upon all states of society without
discrimination.

We put it to those who call themselves Conservatives, whether, when the
tchieft power in society is passing into the hands of the masses, they
really think it possible to prevent the masses from making that power
predominant as well in the government as elsewhere? The triumph of
democracy, or, in Edition: current; Page: [127] other words, of the
government of public opinion, does not depend upon the opinion of any
individual or set of individuals that it ought to triumph, but upon the
natural laws of the progress of wealth, upon the diffusion of reading,
and the increase of the facilities of human intercourse. If Lord Kenyon
or the Duke of Newcastle could stop these, they might accomplish
something. There is no danger of the prevalence of democracy in Syria or
Timbuctoo. But he must be a poor politician who does not know, that
whatever is the growing power in society will force its way into the
government, by fair means or foul. The distribution of constitutional
power cannot long continue very different from that of real power,
without a convulsion. Nor, if the institutions which impede the progress
of democracy could be by any miracle preserved, could even they do more
than render that progress a little slower. Were the Constitution of
Great Britain to remain henceforth unaltered, we are not the less under
the dominion, becoming every day more irresistible, of public opinion.

With regard to the advance of democracy, there are two different
positions which it is possible for a rational person to take up,
according as he thinks the masses prepared, or unprepared, to exercise
the control which they are acquiring over their destiny, in a manner
which would be an improvement upon what now exists. If he thinks them
prepared, he will aid the democratic movement: or if he deem it to be
proceeding fast enough without him, he will at all events refrain from
resisting it. If, on the contrary, he thinks the masses unprepared for
complete control over their government—seeing at the same time that,
prepared or not, they cannot ulongu be prevented from acquiring it—he
will exert his utmost efforts in contributing to prepare them, using all
means, on the one hand, for making the masses themselves wiser and
better; on the other, for so rousing the slumbering energy of the
opulent and lettered classes, so storing the youth of those classes with
the profoundest and most valuable knowledge, so calling forth whatever
of individual greatness exists or can be raised up in the country, as to
create a power which might partially rival the mere power of the masses,
and might exercise the most salutary influence over them for their own
good. When engaged earnestly in works like these, one can understand how
a rational person might think that in order to give more time for the
performance of them, it were well if the current of democracy, which can
in no sort be stayed, could be prevailed upon for a time to flow less
impetuously. With Conservatives of this sort, all vdemocratsv of
corresponding enlargement of waimsw could fraternize as frankly and
cordially as with xmostx of their own friends; and we speak from an
extensive knowledge of the wisest and most high-minded of that body,
when we take upon ourselves to answer for them, that they Edition:
current; Page: [128] would never push forward their own political
projects in a spirit or with a violence which could tend to frustrate
any rational endeavours towards the object nearest their hearts, the
instruction of the understandings and the elevation of the characters of
all classes of their countrymen.

But who is there among the political party calling themselves
Conservatives, that professes to have any such object in view? yDo they
seeky to employ the interval of respite which ztheyz might hope to gain
by withstanding democracy, in qualifying the people to wield the
democracy more wisely when it comes? aWould theya not far rather resist
any such endeavour, on the principle that knowledge is power, and that
its further diffusion would make the dreaded evil come sooner? bDo the
leading Conservatives in either house of parliament feelb that the
character of the higher classes needs renovating, to qualify them for a
more arduous task and a keener strife than has yet fallen to their lot?
Is not the character of a Tory lord or country gentleman, or a Church of
England parson, perfectly satisfactory to them? Is not the existing
constitution of the two Universities—those bodies whose especial duty it
was to counteract the debilitating influence of the circumstances of the
age upon individual character, and to send forth into society a
succession of minds, not the creatures of their age, but capable of
being its improvers and regenerators—the Universities, by whom this
their especial duty has been basely neglected, until, as is usual withc
neglected duties, the very consciousness of it as a duty has faded from
their remembrance,—is not, we say, the existing constitution and the
whole existing system of these Universities, down to the smallest of
their abuses, the exclusion of Dissenters, a thing for which every Tory,
though he may not, as he pretends, die in the last ditch, will at least
vote in the last division? The Church, professedly the other great
instrument of national culture, long since perverted (we speak of rules,
not exceptions) into da grand instrument for discouraging all culture
inconsistent with blindd obedience to established maxims and constituted
authorities—what Tory has a scheme in view for any changes in this body,
but such as may pacify assailants, and make the institution wear a less
disgusting appearance to the eye? What political Tory will not resist to
the very last moment any alteration in that Church, which ewoulde
prevent its livings from being the provision for a family, its dignities
the reward of political or of private services? The Tories, those at
least connected with parliament or office, do not aim at having good
institutions, or even at preserving the present ones: their object is to
profit by them while they exist.

Edition: current; Page: [129]
We scruple not to express our belief that a truer spirit of
fconservationf, as to everything good in the principles and professed
objects of our old institutions, lives in many who are determined
enemies of those institutions in their present state, than in most of
those who call themselves Conservatives. But there are many well-meaning
people who always confound attachment to an end, with gpertinaciousg
adherence to any set of means by which it either is, or is pretended to
be, already pursued; and have yet to learn, that bodies of men who live
in honour and importance upon the pretence of fulfilling ends which they
never honestly seek, are the great hindrance to the attainment of those
ends; and hthath whoever has the attainment really at heart, must
iexpect a war of extermination with all such confederaciesi.

Thus far as to the political effects of Civilization. Its moral effects,
which as yet we have only glanced at, demand further elucidation. They
may be considered under two heads: the direct influence of Civilization
itself upon individual character, and the moral effects produced by the
insignificance into which the individual falls in comparison with the
masses.

One of the effects of a high state of civilization upon character, is a
relaxation of individual energy: or rather, the concentration of it
within the narrow sphere of the individual’s money-getting pursuits. As
civilization advances, every person becomes dependent, for more and more
of what most nearly concerns him, not upon his own exertions, but upon
the general arrangements of society. In a rude state, each man’s
personal security, the protection of his family, his property, his
liberty itself, jdependj greatly upon his bodily strength and his mental
energy or cunning: in a civilized state, all this is secured to him by
causes extrinsic to himself. The growing mildness of manners is a
protection to him against much that he was before exposed to, while for
the remainder he may rely with constantly increasing assurance upon the
soldier, the policeman, and the judge, and (where the efficiency or
purity of those instruments, as is usually the case, lags behind the
general march of civilization) upon the advancing strength of public
opinion. There remain, as inducements to call forth energy of character,
the desire of wealth or of personal aggrandizement, the passion of
philanthropy, and the love of active virtue. But the objects to which
these various feelings point are matters of choice, not of necessity,
nor do the feelings act with anything like equal force upon all minds.
The only one of them which can be considered as anything like universal,
is the desire of wealth; and wealth being, in the case of the majority,
the most accessible means of gratifying all their other desires,
Edition: current; Page: [130] nearly the whole of the energy of
character which exists in highly civilized societies concentrates itself
on the pursuit of that object. In the case, however, of the most
influential classes—those whose energies, if they had them, might be
exercised on the greatest scale and with the most considerable
result—the desire of wealth is already sufficiently satisfied, to render
them averse to suffer pain or incur kmuchk voluntary labour for the sake
of any further increase. The same classes also enjoy, from their station
alone, a high degree of personal consideration. Except the high offices
of the lStatel, there is hardly anything to tempt the ambition of men in
their circumstances. Those offices, when a great nobleman could have
them for asking for, and keep them with less trouble than he could
manage his private estate, were, no doubt, desirable enough possessions
for such persons; but when they become posts of labour, vexation, and
anxiety, and besides cannot be had without paying the price of some
previous toil, experience shows that among men unaccustomed to sacrifice
their amusements and their case, the number upon whom these high offices
operate as incentives to activity, or in whom they call forth any vigour
of character, is extremely limited. Thus it happens that in highly
civilized countries, and particularly among ourselves, the energies of
the middle classes are almost confined to money-getting, and those of
the higher classes are nearly extinct.

There is another circumstance to which we may trace much both of the
good and of the bad qualities which distinguish our civilization from
the rudeness of former times. One of the effects of civilization (not to
say one of the ingredients in it) is, that the spectacle, and even the
very idea, of pain, is kept more and more out of the sight of those
classes who enjoy in their fulness the benefits of civilization. The
state of perpetual personal conflict, rendered necessary by the
circumstances ofm former times, and from which it was hardly possible
for any person, in whatever rank of society, to be exempt, necessarily
habituated every one to the spectacle of harshness, rudeness, and
violence, to the struggle of one indomitable will against another, and
to the alternate suffering and infliction of pain. These things,
consequently, were not as revolting even to the best and most actively
benevolent men of former days, as they are to our own; and we find the
recorded conduct of those men frequently such as would be universally
considered very unfeeling in a person of our own day. They, however,
thought less of the infliction of pain, because they thought less of
pain altogether. When we read of actions of the Greeks and Romans, or
nofn our own ancestors, denoting callousness to human suffering, we must
not think that those who committed these actions were as cruel as we
must become before we could do the like. The pain which they inflicted,
they were in the habit of voluntarily undergoing Edition: current; Page:
[131] from slight causes; it did not appear to them as great an evil, as
it appears, and as it really is, to us, nor did it in any way degrade
their minds. In our own time the necessity of personal collision between
one person and another is, comparatively speaking, almost at an end. All
those necessary portions of the business of society which oblige any
person to be the immediate agent or ocular witness of the infliction of
pain, are delegated by common consent to peculiar and narrow classes; to
the judge, the soldier, the surgeon, the butcher, and the executioner.
To most people in easy circumstances, any pain, except that inflicted
upon the body by accident or disease, and oupon the mind by the
inevitable sorrows of lifeo, is rather a thing known of than actually
experienced. This is much more emphatically true in the more refined
classes, and as refinement advances; for it is in pavoiding the presence
not only of actual pain, but of whatever suggests offensive or
disagreeable ideas, that a great part ofp refinement consists. We may
remark too, that this is possible only by a perfection of mechanical
arrangements impracticable in any but a high state of civilization. Now,
most kinds of pain and annoyance appear much more unendurable to those
who have little experience of them, than to those who have much. The
consequence is that, compared with former times, there is in the qmore
opulentq classes of modern civilized communities much more of the
amiable and humane, and much less of the heroic. The heroic essentially
consists in being ready, for a worthy object, to do and to suffer, but
especially to do, what is painful or disagreeable; and whoever does not
early learn rto be capable ofr this, will never be a great character.
There has crept over the refined classes, over the whole class of
gentlemen in England, a moral effeminacy, an inaptitude for every kind
of struggle. They shrink from all effort, from everything which is
troublesome and disagreeable. sThe same causes which render them
sluggish and unenterprising, make them, it is true, for the most part,
stoical under inevitable evils.s But heroism is an active, not a passive
quality; and when it is necessary not to bear pain but to seek it,
little needs be expected from the men of the present day. They cannot
undergo labour, they cannot tbrook ridicule, they cannot bravet evil
tongues; they have not hardihood to say an unpleasant thing to any one
whom they are in the habit of seeing, or to face, even with a nation at
their back, the coldness of some little ucoterieu which Edition:
current; Page: [132] surrounds them. This torpidity and cowardice, as a
general characteristic, is new in the world; but (modified by the
different temperaments of different nations) it is a natural consequence
of the progress of civilization, and will continue until met by a system
of cultivation adapted to counteract it.

If the source of great virtues thus dries up, great vices are placed, no
doubt, under considerable restraint. The régime of public opinion is
adverse to at least the indecorous vices; and as that restraining power
gains strength, and certain classes or individuals cease to possess a
virtual exemption from it, the change is highly favourable to the
outward decencies of life. Nor can it be denied that the diffusion of
even such knowledge as civilization naturally brings, has no slight
tendency to rectify, though it be but partially, the standard of public
opinion; to undermine many of those prejudices and superstitions which
vmadev mankind hate each other for things not really odious; to make
them take a juster measure of the tendencies of actions, and weigh more
correctly the evidence on which they condemn or applaud their
fellow-creatures; to make, in short, their approbation direct itself
more correctly to good actions, and their disapprobation to bad. What
are the limits to this natural improvement in public opinion, when there
is no other sort of cultivation going on than that which is the
accompaniment of civilization, we need not at present inquire. It is
enough that within those limits there is an extensive range; that as
muchw improvement in the general understanding, softening of the
feelings, and decay of pernicious errors, as naturally attends the
progress of wealth and the spread of reading, suffices to render the
judgment of the public upon actions and persons, so far as evidence is
before them, much more discriminating and correct.

But here presents itself another ramification of the effects of
civilization, which it has often surprised us to find so little attended
to. The individual becomes so lost in the crowd, that though he depends
more and more upon opinion, he is apt to depend less and less upon
well-grounded opinion; upon the opinion of those who know him. An
established character becomes at once more difficult to gain, and more
easily to be dispensed with.

It is in a small society, where everybody knows everybody, that public
opinion, xso far asx well directed, exercises its most salutary
influence. Take the case of a tradesman in a small country town: to
every one of his customers he is long and yaccuratelyy known; their
opinion of him has been formed after repeated trials; if he could
deceive them once, he cannot hope to go on deceiving them in the quality
of his goods; he has no other customers to look zforz if he loses these,
while, if his goods are really what they aprofessa to be, he may hope,
among so few competitors, that this also will be known Edition: current;
Page: [133] and recognised, and that he will acquire the character,
bindividually and professionallyb, which his conduct entitles him to.
Far different is the case of a man setting up in business in the crowded
streets of a great city. If he trust solely to the quality of his goods,
to the honesty and faithfulness with which he performs what he
undertakes, he may remain ten years without a customer; be he ever so
honest, he is driven to cry out on the housetops that his wares are the
best of wares, past, present, and to come; while, if he proclaim this,
choweverc false, with sufficient loudness to excite the curiosity of
passers by, and can give his commodities d“a gloss, a saleable look,”d
not easily to be seen through at a superficial glance, he may drive a
thriving trade though no customer ever enter his shop twice. There has
been much complaint of late years, of the growth, both in the world of
trade and in that of intellect, of quackery, and especially of puffing;
but nobody seems to have remarked, that these are the inevitable
efruitse of immense competition; of a state of society where any voice,
not pitched in an exaggerated key, is lost in the hubbub. Success, in so
crowded a field, depends not upon what a person is, but upon what he
seems: mere marketable qualities become the object instead of
substantial ones, and a man’s labour and capital are expended less in
fdoingf anything, than in persuading other people that he has done it.
Our own age has seen this evil brought to its consummation. Quackery
there always was, but it once was a test of the absence of sterling
qualities: there was a proverb that good wine needed no bush. It is our
own age which has seen the honest dealer driven to quackery, by hard
necessity, and the certainty of being undersold by the dishonest. For
the first time, arts for attracting public attention form a necessary
part of the qualifications even of the deserving: and skill in these
goes farther than any other quality towards ensuring success. The same
intensity of competition drives the trading public more and more to play
high for success, to throw for all or nothing; and this, together with
the difficulty of sure calculations in a field of commerce so widely
extended, renders bankruptcy no longer disgraceful, because no longer
gan almost certain presumption of eitherg dishonesty or imprudence: the
discredit which it still incurs belongs to it, alas! mainly as an
indication of poverty. Thus public opinion loses another of those simple
criteria of desert, which, and which alone, it is capable of correctly
applying; and the very cause which has rendered it omnipotent in the
gross, weakens the precision and force with which its judgment is
brought home to individuals.

It is not solely on the private virtues, that this growing
insignificance of the individual in the mass is productive of mischief.
It corrupts the very fountain of the improvement of public opinion
itself; it corrupts public Edition: current; Page: [134] teaching; it
weakens the influence of the more cultivated few over the many.
Literature has suffered more than any other human production by the
common disease. When there were few books, and when few read at all save
those who had been accustomed to read the best authors, books were
written with the well-grounded expectation that they would be read
carefully, and if they deserved it, would be read often. A book of
sterling merit, when it came out, was sure to be heard of, and might
hope to be read, by the whole reading class; it might succeed by its
real hexcellences, thoughh not got up to strike at once; and even if so
got up, unless it had the support of genuine merit, it fell into
oblivion. The rewards were then for him who wrote well, not much; for
the laborious and learned, not the crude and ill-informed writer. But
now the case is reversed.

iThis is a reading age; and precisely because it is so reading an age,
any book which is the result of profound meditation is, perhaps, less
likely to be duly and profitably read than at a former period. The world
reads too much and too quickly to read well. When books were few, to get
through one was a work of time and labour: what was written with thought
was read with thought, and with a desire to extract from it as much of
the materials of knowledge as possible. But when almost every person who
can spell, can and will write, what is to be done? It is difficult to
know what to read, except by reading everything; and so much of the
world’s business is now transacted through the press, that it is
necessary to know what is printed, if we desire to know what is going
on. Opinion weighs with so vast a weight in the balance of events, that
ideas of no value in themselves are of importance from the mere
circumstance that they are ideas, and have a bonâ fide existence as such
anywhere out of Bedlam. The world, in consequence, gorges itself with
intellectual food, and in order to swallow the more, holts it. Nothing
is now read slowly, or twice over. Books are run through with no less
rapidity, and scarcely leave a more durable impression, than a newspaper
article. It is for this, among other causes, that so few books are
produced of any value. The lioness in the fable boasted that though she
produced only one at a birth, that one was a lion. But if each lion only
counted for one, and each leveret for one, the advantage would all be on
the side of the hare. When every unit is individually weak, it is only
multitude that tells. jWhat wonderj that the newspapers should carry all
before them? A book produces khardly ak greater effect than an article,
and there can be 365 of these in one year. He, therefore, who should and
would write a book, and write it in the proper manner of writing a book,
now dashes down his first hasty thoughts, or what he mistakes for
thoughts, in a periodical. And the public is in the predicament of an
indolent man, who cannot bring himself to apply his mind vigorously to
his own affairs, and over whom, therefore, not he who speaks most
wisely, but he who speaks most frequently, obtains the influence.*

Edition: current; Page: [135]
Hence we see that literature is becoming more and more ephemeral: books,
of any solidity, are malmostm gone by; even reviews are not now
considered sufficiently light; the attention cannot sustain itself on
any serious subject, even for the space of a review-article. In the more
attractive kinds of literature, nnovels and magazines, thoughn the
demand has so greatly increased, the supply has so outstripped it, that
even a novel is seldom a lucrative speculation. It is only under
circumstances of rare attraction that a bookseller will now give
anything to an author for copyright. As the difficulties of success thus
progressively increase, all other ends are more and more sacrificed for
the attainment of it: literature becomes more and more a mere reflection
of the current sentiments, and has almost entirely abandoned its mission
as an enlightener and improver of them.

There are now in this country, we may say, but two modes left in which
an individual mind can hope to produce much direct effect upon the minds
and destinies of his countrymen generally; as a member of parliament, or
an editor of a London newspaper. In both these capacities much may still
be done by an individual, because, while the power of the collective
body is very great, the number of participants in it does not admit of
much increase. One of these monopolies will be opened to competition
when the newspaper stamp is taken off;[*] whereby the importance of the
newspaper press in the aggregate, considered as the voice of public
opinion, will beo increased, and the influence of any one writer in
helping to form that opinion pnecessarilyp diminished. This we might
regret, did we not remember to what ends that influence is now used, and
is sure to be so while newspapers are a mere investment of capital for
the sake of mercantile profit.

Is there, then, no remedy? Are the decay of individual energy, the
weakening of the influence of superior minds over the multitude, the
growth of qcharlatanerieq, and the diminished efficacy of public opinion
as a restraining power,—are these the price we necessarily pay for the
benefits of civilization; and can they only be avoided by checking the
diffusion of knowledge, discouraging the spirit of combination,
prohibiting improvements in the arts of life, and repressing the further
increase of wealth and of production? Assuredly not. Those advantages
which civilization cannot give—which in its uncorrected influence it has
even a tendency to destroy—may yet coexist with civilization; and it is
only when joined to civilization that they can produce Edition: current;
Page: [136] their fairest fruits. All that we are in danger of losing we
may preserve, all that we have lost we may regain, and bring to a
perfection hitherto unknown; but not by slumbering, and leaving things
to themselves, no more than by ridiculously trying our strength against
their irresistible tendencies: only by establishing counter-tendencies,
which may combine with those tendencies, and modify them.

The evils are, that the individual is lost and becomes impotent in the
crowd, and that individual character itself becomes relaxed and
enervated. For the first evil, the remedy is, greater and more perfect
combination among individuals; for the second, national institutions of
education, and forms of polity, calculated to invigorate the individual
character.

The former of these rdesideratar, as its attainment depends upon a
change in the habits of society itself, can only be realized by degrees,
as the necessity becomes felt; but circumstances are even now to a
certain extent forcing it on. In Great Britain especially (which so far
surpasses the rest of the solds world in the extent and rapidity of the
accumulation of wealth) the fall of profits, consequent upon the vast
increase of population and capital, is rapidly extinguishing the class
of small dealers and small producers, from the impossibility of living
on their diminished profits, and is throwing business of all kinds more
and more into the hands of large capitalists—whether these be rich
individuals, or joint-stock companies formed by the aggregation of many
small capitals. We are not among those who believe that this progress is
tending to the complete extinction oft competition, or that the entire
productive resources of the country will within any assignable number of
ages, if ever, be administered by, and for the benefit of, a general
association of the whole community. But we believe that the
multiplication of competitors in all branches of business and in all
professions—which renders it more and more difficult to obtain success
by merit alone, more and more easy to obtain it by plausible
pretence—will find a limiting principle in the progress of the spirit of
co-operation; that in every overcrowded department there will arise a
tendency among individuals so to unite their ulabour or their capitalu,
that the purchaser or employer will have to choose, not among
innumerable individuals, but among a few groups. Competition will be as
active as ever, but the number of competitors will be brought within
manageable bounds.

Such a spirit of co-operation is most of all wanted among the
intellectual classes and professions. The amount of human labour, and
labour of the most precious kind, now wasted, and wasted too in the
cruelest manner, for want of combination, is incalculable. What a
spectacle, for instance, does the medical profession present! One
successful practitioner burthened with Edition: current; Page: [137]
more work than mortal man can perform, and which he performs so
summarily that it were often better let alone;—in the surrounding
streets twenty unhappy men, each of whom has been as laboriously and
expensively trained as he has to do the very same thing, and is possibly
as well qualified, wasting their capabilities and starving for want of
work. Under better arrangements these twenty would form a corps of
subalterns marshalled under their more successful leader; who (granting
him to be really the ablest physician of the set, and not merely the
most successful imposter) is wasting time in physicking people for
headaches and heartburns, which he might with better economy of
mankind’s resources turn over to his subordinates, while he employed his
maturer powers and greater experience in studying and treating those
more obscure and difficult cases upon which science has not yet thrown
sufficient light, and to which ordinary knowledge and abilities would
not be adequate. By such means every person’s capacities would be turned
to account, and the highest minds being kept for the highest things,
these would make progress, while ordinary occasions would be no losers.

But it is in literature, above all, that a change of this sort is of
most pressing urgency. There the system of individual competition has
fairly worked itself out, and things vcan hardlyv continue much longer
as they are, Literature is a province of exertion upon which more, of
the first value to human nature, depends, than upon any other; a
province in which the highest and most valuable order of works, those
which most contribute to form the opinions and shape the characters of
subsequent ages, are, more than in any other class of productions,
placed beyond the possibility of appreciation by those who form the bulk
of the purchasers in the book-market; insomuch that, even in ages when
these were a far less numerous and more select class than now, it was an
admitted point that the only success which writers of the first order
could look to was the verdict of posterity. That verdict could, in those
times, be confidently expected by whoever was worthy of it; for the good
judges, though few in number, were sure to read every work of merit
which appeared; and as the recollection of one book was not in those
days immediately obliterated by a hundred others, they remembered it,
and kept alive the knowledge of it to subsequent ages. But in our day,
from the immense multitude of writers (which is now not less remarkable
than the multitude of readers), and from the manner in which the people
of this age are obliged to read, it is difficult for what does not
strike during its novelty, to strike at all: a book either misses fire
altogether, or is so read as to make no permanent impression; and the
wgood equally with the worthlessw are forgotten by the next day.

For this there is no remedy, while the public have no guidance beyond
Edition: current; Page: [138] booksellers’ advertisements, and the
xill-considered and hasty criticismsx of newspapers and small
periodicals, to direct them in distinguishing what is not worth reading
from what is. The resource must in time be, some organized co-operation
among the leading intellects of the age, whereby works of first-rate
merit, of whatever class, and of whatever tendency in point of opinion,
might come forth with the stamp on them, from the first, of the approval
of those whose ynamesy would carry authority. There are many causes why
we must wait long for such a combination; but (with enormous defects,
both in plan and in execution) the Society for the Diffusion of Useful
Knowledge was as considerable a step towards it, as could be expected in
the present state of men’s minds, and in a first attempt. Literature has
had in this country two ages; it must now have a third. The age of
patronage, as Johnson a century ago proclaimed, is gone. The age of
booksellers, it has been proclaimed zby Mr. Carlyle, hasz well nigh died
out.[*] In the first there was nothing intrinsically base, nor in the
second anything inherently independent and liberal. Each has done great
things; both have had their day. The time is aperhapsa coming when
authors, as a collective guild, bwillb be their own patrons and their
own booksellers.

These things must bide their time. But the other of the two great
cdesideratac, the regeneration of individual character among our
lettered and opulent classes, by the adaptation to that purpose of our
institutions, and, above all, of our educational institutions, is an
object of more urgency, and for which more might be immediately
accomplished, if the will and the understanding were not alike wanting.

This, unfortunately, is a subject on which, for the inculcation of
rational views, everything is yet to be done; for, all that we would
inculcate, all that we deem of vital importance, all upon which we
conceive the salvation of the next and all future ages to rest, has the
misfortune to be almost equally opposed to the most popular doctrines of
our own time, and to the prejudices of those who cherish the empty husk
of what has descended from ancient times. We are at issue equally with
the admirers of Oxford and Cambridge. Eton and Westminster, and with the
generality of their professed reformers. We regard the system of those
institutions, as dadministered for two centuries Edition: current; Page:
[139] pastd, with sentiments little short of utter abhorrence. But we do
not conceive that their vices would be cured by bringing their studies
into a closer connexion with what it is the fashion to term “the
business of the world;” by dismissing the logic and classics which are
still eprofessedlye taught, to substitute modern languages and
experimental physics. We would have classics and logic taught far more
really and deeply than at present, and we would add to them other
studies more alien than any which yet exist to the “business of the
world,” but more germane to the great business of every rational
being—the strengthening and enlarging of his own intellect and
character. The empirical knowledge which the world demands, which is the
stock in trade of money-getting-life, we would leave the world to
provide for itself; content with infusing into the youth of our country
a spirit, and training them to habits, which would ensure their
acquiring such knowledge easily, and using it well. These, we know, are
not the sentiments of the vulgar; but we believe them to be those of the
best and wisest of all parties: and we are glad to corroborate our
opinion by a quotation from a work written by a friend to the
Universities, and by one whose tendencies are rather Conservative than
Liberal; a book which, though really, and not in form merely, one of
fiction, contains much subtle and ingenious thought, and the results of
much psychological experience, combined, we are compelled to say, with
much caricature, and very provoking (though we are convinced
unintentional) distortion and misinterpretation of the opinions of some
of those with whose philosophy that of the author does not agree.

“You believe” (a clergyman loquitur) “that the University is to prepare
youths for a successful career in society: I believe the sole object is
to give them that manly character which will enable them to resist the
influences of society. I do not care to prove that I am right, and that
any university which does not stand upon this basis will be rickety in
its childhood, and useless or mischievous in its manhood; I care only to
assert that this was the notion of those who founded Oxford and
Cambridge. I fear that their successors are gradually losing sight of
this principle—are gradually beginning to think that it is their
business to turn out clever lawyers and serviceable Treasury clerks—are
pleased when the world compliments them upon the goodness of the article
with which they have furnished it—and that this low vanity is absorbing
all their will and their power to create great men, whom the age will
scorn, and who will save it from the scorn of the times to come.”

“One or two such men,” said the Liberal, “in a generation, may be very
useful; but the University gives us two or three thousand youths every
year. I suppose you are content that a portion shall do week-day
services.”

“I wish to have a far more hard-working and active race than we have at
present,” said the clergyman: “men more persevering in toil, and less
impatient of reward; but all experience, a thing which the schools are
not privileged to despise, though the world is—all experience is against
the notion, that the means to procure a supply of good ordinary men is
to attempt nothing higher I know Edition: current; Page: [140] that
nine-tenths of those whom the University sends out must be hewers of
wood and drawers of water; but, if I train the ten-tenths to be so,
depend upon it the wood will be badly cut, the water will be spilt. Aim
at something noble; make your system such that a great man may be formed
by it, and there will be a manhood in your little men of which you do
not dream. But when some skilful rhetorician, or lucky rat, stands at
the top of the ladder—when the University, instead of disclaiming the
creature, instead of pleading, as an excuse for themselves, that the
healthiest mother may, by accident, produce a shapeless abortion, stands
shouting, that the world may know what great things they can do, ‘we
taught the boy!’—when the hatred which worldly men will bear to religion
always, and to learning whenever it teaches us to soar and not to
grovel, is met, not with a frank defiance, but rather with a deceitful
argument to show that trade is the better for them; is it wonderful that
a puny beggarly feeling should pervade the mass of our young men? that
they should scorn all noble achievements, should have no higher standard
of action than the world’s opinion, and should conceive of no higher
reward than to sit down amidst loud cheering, which continues for
several moments?”*

Nothing can be more just or more forcible than the description here
given of the objects which University education should aim at: we are at
issue with the writer, only on the proposition that these objects ever
were attained, or ever could be so, consistently with the principle
which has always been the foundation of the English Universities; a
principle, unfortunately, by no means confined to them. The difficultyg
which continues to oppose either such reform of our old academical
institutions, or the establishment of such new ones, as shall give us an
education capable of forming great minds, is, that in order to do so it
is necessary to begin by eradicating the idea which nearly all the
upholders and nearly all the impugners of the Universities rootedly
entertain, as to the objects not merely of academical education, but of
education itself. What is this idea? That the object of education is,
not to qualify the pupil for judging what is true or what is right, but
to provide that he shall think true what we think true, and right what
we think right—that hto teach, means to inculcate our own opinions, and
that our business is not to make thinkers or inquirers, but disciplesh.
This is the deep-seated error, the inveterate prejudice, which the real
reformer of English education has to struggle against. Is it astonishing
that great minds are not produced, in a country where the test of a
great mind is, agreeing in the opinions of the small minds? where every
institution for spiritual culture which the country has—the Church, the
Universities, and almost every dissenting community—are Edition:
current; Page: [141] constituted on the following as their avowed
principle: that the object is, not that the individual should go forth
determined and qualified to seek truth ardently, vigorously, and
disinterestedly; not that he be furnished at setting out with the
needful aids and facilities, the needful materials and instruments for
that search, and then left to the unshackled use of them; not that, by a
free communion with the thoughts and deeds of the great minds which
preceded him, he be inspired at once with the courage to dare all which
truth andi conscience require, and the modesty to weigh well the grounds
of what others think, before adopting contrary opinions of his own: not
this—no; but that the triumph of the system, the merit, the excellence
in the sight of God which it possesses, or which it can impart to its
pupil, is, that his speculations shall terminate in the adoption, in
words, of a particular set of opinions. That provided he adhere to these
opinions, it matters little whether he receive them from authority or
from examination; and worse, that it matters little by what temptations
of interest or vanity, by what voluntary or involuntary sophistication
with his intellect, and deadening of his noblest feelings, that result
is arrived at; that it even matters comparatively little whether to his
mind the words are mere words, or the representatives of realities—in
what sense he receives the favoured set of propositions, or whether he
attaches to them any sense at all. Were ever great minds thus formed?
jNever.j The few great minds which this country has produced have been
formed in spite of nearly everything which could be done to stifle their
growth. And all thinkers, much above the common order, who have grown up
in the Church of England, or in any other Church, have been produced in
latitudinarian epochs, or while the impulse of intellectual emancipation
which gave existence to the Church had not quite spent itself. The flood
of burning metal which issued from the furnace, flowed on a few paces
before it congealed.

That the English Universities have, throughout, proceeded on the
principle, that the intellectual association of mankind must be founded
upon articles, i.e. upon a promise of belief in certain opinions; that
the scope of all they do is to prevail upon their pupils, by fair means
or foul, to acquiesce in the opinions which are set down for them; that
the abuse of the human faculties so forcibly denounced by Locke under
the name of “principling” their pupils,[*] is their sole method in
religion, politics, morality, or philosophy—is vicious indeed, but the
vice is equally prevalent without and within their pale, and is no
farther disgraceful to them than inasmuch as a better doctrine has been
taught for a century past by the superior spirits, Edition: current;
Page: [142] with whom in point of intelligence it was their duty to
maintain themselves on a level. But, that when this object was attained
they cared for no other; that if they could make churchmen, they cared
not to make religious men; that if they could make Tories, whether they
made patriots was indifferent to them; that if they could prevent
heresy, they cared not if the price paid were stupidity—this constitutes
the peculiar baseness of those bodies. Look at them. While their
sectarian character, while the exclusion of all who will not sign away
their freedom of thought, is contended for as if life depended upon it,
there is khardlyk a trace in the system of the Universities that any
other object whatever is seriously cared for. Nearly all the
professorships have degenerated into sinecures. Few of the professors
ever deliver a lecture. One of the few great scholars who have issued
from either University for a century (and he was such before he went
thither), the Rev. Connop Thirlwall, has published to the world that in
his University at least, even ltheology—even Church of England
theologyl—is not taught;[*] and his dismissal, for this piece of
honesty, from the tutorship of his college, is one among the daily
proofs how much safer it is for twenty men to neglect their duty, than
for one man to impeach them of the neglect. The only studies really
encouraged are classics and mathematics; mboth of them highly valuable
studiesm, though the last, as an nexclusiven instrument for fashioning
the mental powers, greatly overrated; but Mr. Whewell, a high authority
against his own University, haso published a pamphlet,[†] chiefly to
prove that the kind of mathematical attainment by which Cambridge
honours are gained, expertness in the use of the calculus, is not that
kind which has any tendency to produce superiority of intellect.* The
mere shell and husk of the syllogistic Edition: current; Page: [143]
logic at the one University, the wretchedest smattering of Locke and
Paley at the other, are all of moral or psychological science that is
taught at either.* As a means of educating the many, the Universities
are absolutely null. The youth of England are not educated. The
attainments rof any kindr required for taking all the degreess conferred
by these bodies are, at Cambridge, utterly contemptible; at Oxford, we
believe, of late years, somewhat higher, but still very low. Honours,
indeed, are not gained but by a severe struggle; tand if even the
candidates for honours were mentally benefited, the systemt would not be
worthless. But what have the senior wranglers done, even in mathematics?
Has Cambridge producedu, since Newton, one great mathematical geniusu?
vWe do not say an Euler, a Laplace, or a Lagrange, but such as France
has produced a score of during the same period.v How many books which
have thrown light upon the history, antiquities, philosophy, art, or
literature of the ancients, have the two Universities sent forth since
the Reformation? Compare them not merely with Germany, but even with
Italy or France. When a man is pronounced by them to have excelled in
their studies, what do the Universities do? They give him an income, not
for continuing to learn, but for having learnt, not for doing anything,
but for what he has already done: on condition solely of living like a
monk, and putting on the livery of the Church at the end of seven years.
They bribe men by high rewards to get their arms ready, but do not
require them to fight.†

Are these the places xof educationx which are to send forth minds
capable of maintaining a victorious struggle with the debilitating
influences of the age, and strengthening the yweakery side of
Civilization by the support of a higher Cultivation? This, however, is
what we require from these institutions; or, in their default, from
others which zshouldz take their place. And Edition: current; Page:
[144] the very first step towards their reform ashoulda be to
unsectarianize them wholly—not by the paltry measure of allowing
Dissenters to come and be taught orthodox sectarianism, but by putting
an end to sectarian teaching altogether. The principle itself of
dogmatic religion, dogmatic morality, dogmatic philosophy, is what
requires to be rooted out; not any particular manifestation of that
principle.

The very corner-stone of an education intended to form great minds, must
be the recognition of the principle, that the object is to call forth
the greatest possible quantity of intellectual power, and to inspire the
intensest love of truth: and this without a particle of regard to the
results to which the exercise of that power may lead, even though it
should conduct the pupil to opinions diametrically opposite to those of
his teachers. We say this, not because we think opinions unimportant,
butb because of the immense importance which we attach to them; for in
proportion to the degree of intellectual power and love of truth which
we succeed in creating, is the certainty that (whatever may happen in
any one particular instance) in the aggregate of instances true opinions
will be the result; and intellectual power and practical love of truth
are alike impossible where the reasoner is shown his conclusions, and
informed beforehand that he is expected to arrive at them.

We are not so absurd as to propose that the teacher should not cset
forthc his own opinions as the true ones, and exert his utmost powers to
exhibit their truth in the strongest light. To abstain from this would
be to nourish the worst intellectual habit of all, that of not finding,
and not looking for, certainty in anything. But the teacher himself
should not be held to any creed; nor should the question be whether dhis
own opinionsd are the true ones, but whether he eis well instructed in
those of other peoplee, and, in enforcing his own, states the arguments
for all conflicting opinions fairly. In this spirit it is that all the
great subjects are taught from the chairs of the German and French
Universities. fAs a general rule, thef most distinguished teacher is
selected, whatever be his particular views, and he consequently teaches
in the spirit of free inquiry, not of dogmatic imposition.g

Such is the principle of all academical instruction which aims at
forming great minds. The details hcannot be too various and
comprehensive.h Ancient Edition: current; Page: [145] literature would
fill a large place in such a course of instruction; because it ibringsi
before us the thoughts and actions of many great minds, minds of many
various orders of greatness, and these related and exhibited in a manner
tenfold more impressive, tenfold more calculated to call forth jhighj
aspirations, than in any modern literature. Imperfectly as these
impressions are made by the current modes of classical teaching, it is
incalculable what we owe to this, the sole ennobling feature in the
slavish, mechanical thing which the moderns call education. Nor is it to
be forgotten among the benefits of familiarity with the monuments of
antiquity, and especially those of Greece, that we are taught by it to
appreciate and to admire intrinsic greatness, amidst opinions, habits,
and institutions most remote from ours; and are thus trained to that
large and catholic toleration, which is founded on understanding, not on
indifference—and to a habit of free, open sympathy with powers of mind
and nobleness of character, howsoever exemplified. Were but the
languages and literature of antiquity so taught that the glorious images
they present might stand before the student’s eyes as living and glowing
realities—that, instead of lying a caput mortuum at the bottom of his
mind, like some foreign substance in no way influencing the current of
his thoughts or the tone of his feelings, they might circulate through
it, and become assimilated, and be part and parcel of himself!—then
should we see how little these studies have yet done for us, compared
with what they have yet to do.

An important place in the system of education which we contemplate would
be occupied by history:k because it is the record of alll great things
which have been achieved by mankind, andm because when philosophically
studied it gives a certain largeness of conception to the student, and
familiarizes him with the action of great causes. In no other way can he
so completely realize in his own mind (howsoever he may be satisfied
with the proof of them as abstract propositions) the great principles by
which the progress of man and the condition of society are governed.
Nowhere else will the infinite varieties of human nature be so vividly
brought home to him, and anything cramped or one-sided in his own
standard of it so effectually corrected; and nowhere else will he behold
so strongly exemplified the astonishing pliability of our nature,[*] and
the vast effects which may under good guidance be produced upon it by
honest endeavour. The literature of our own and other modern nations
should be studied along with the history, or rather asn part of the
history.

Edition: current; Page: [146]
In the department of pure intellect, the highest place will belong to
logic and the philosophy of mind: the one, the instrument for the
cultivation of all sciences; the other, the root from which they all
grow. It scarcely needs be said that the former oought not too be taught
as a mere system of technical rules, nor the latter as a set of
concatenated abstract propositions. The tendency, so strong everywhere,
is strongest of all here, to receive opinions into the mind without any
real understanding of them, merely because they seem to follow from
certain admitted premises, and to let them lie there as forms of words,
lifeless and void of meaning. The pupil must be led to interrogate his
own consciousness, to observe and experiment upon himself: of the mind,
by any other process, little will he ever know.

With these should be joined all those sciences, in which great and
certain results are arrived at by mental processes of some length or
nicety: not that all persons should study all these sciences, but that
some should study all, and all some. These may be divided into sciences
of mere ratiocination, as mathematics; and sciences partly of
ratiocination, and partly of what is far more difficult, comprehensive
observation and analysis. Such are, in their rationale, even the
sciences to which pmathematical processes are applicable:p and such are
all those which relate to human nature. The philosophy of morals, of
government, of law, of political economy, of poetry and art, should form
subjects of systematic instruction, under the most eminent professors
who could be found; these being chosen, not for the particular doctrines
they might happen to profess, but as being those who were most likely to
send forth pupils qualified in point of disposition and attainments to
choose doctrines for themselves. And why should not religion be taught
in the same manner? Not quntil then will one step be made towards the
healing of religious differences: not untilq then will the spirit of
English religion become catholic instead of sectarian, favourable
instead of hostile to freedom of thought and the progress of the human
mind.

rWith regard to the changes, in forms of polity and social arrangements,
which in addition to reforms in education, we conceive to be required
for regenerating the character of the higher classes; to express them
even summarily would require a long discourse. But the general idea from
which they all emanate, may be stated briefly.r Civilization has brought
about a degree of security and fixity in the possession of all
advantages once acquired, which Edition: current; Page: [147] has
rendered its possible for a rich man to lead the life of a Sybarite, and
nevertheless enjoy throughout life a degree of power and consideration
which could formerly be earned or retained only by personal activity. We
cannot undo what civilization has done, and again stimulate the energy
of the higher classes by insecurity of property, or danger of life or
limb. The only adventitious motive it is in the power of society to hold
out, is reputation and consequence; and of this as much use as possible
should be made for the encouragement of desert. The main thing which
social changes can do for the improvement of the higher classes—and it
is what the progress of democracy is insensibly but certainly
accomplishing—is gradually to put an end to every kind of unearned
distinction, and let the only road open to honour and ascendancy be that
of personal qualities.

Edition: current; Page: [148] Edition: current; Page: [149]


ESSAYS ON GOVERNMENT
 1840

Edition: current; Page: [150]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London and Westminster Review, XXXIV (Sept., 1840), 518-19, in
“Philosophy and Legislation” section, headed “Essays on Government,
1839. [London:] Effingham Wilson.” Signed “A.” Not republished
Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A short notice of a book entitled
‘Essays on Government’ in the same number of the same review.” (I.e., in
the same number as his review of Milnes’s Poetry for the People, the
previous item in the bibliography.) (MacMinn, 52.) No copy in the
Somerville College Library. There are no references to this brief review
in JSM’s Autobiography or letters.

Edition: current; Page: [151]


Essays on Government

this little volume is unquestionably the production of a thinker, though
of one who has not yet thought with much originality or depth. It is,
however, interesting, as indicative of the ideas which thinkers of a
numerous and increasing class are now becoming possessed of, and eagerly
turning to use.

For instance, the author’s first fundamental principle is, that the
successive changes which take place in human affairs are no more left to
chance “in the moral than in the physical world, but that the progress
of society, social, moral, and political, together with the whole train
of events which compose the history of the human race, are as much the
effect of certain fixed laws as the motions of the planets or the
rotation of the seasons.” [P. 2] His second principle is, that the
changes in political institutions are the effects of previous changes in
the condition of society and of the human mind. It may truly be said,
that whoever knows these two principles, possesses more of the science
of politics than was known even to eminent thinkers fifty years ago.

Setting out from this starting point, our author ends his inquiries in
the common conclusions of radicalism; but shows less acquaintance than
might be wished with the real difficulties of the subject, and with the
point which the discussion has now reached among political philosophers.
He lays it down as a maxim that there is everywhere a natural
aristocracy, that is, a class who are looked up to by the community
generally; that, in a rude age, nobles, or priests, or persons of large
property, form this class; in an enlightened period, it consists of the
persons most distinguished for wisdom and virtue. In every age, unless
the natural aristocracy be the power which governs, there will be
growing disaffection to the government, and at length either a peaceable
or a violent change. Having established that the natural aristocracy in
a highly civilised society is the aristocracy of personal qualities, he
affirms, and has little difficulty in showing, that neither an
aristocracy of birth nor one of wealth affords any guarantee for the
existence of these qualities. He therefore recommends, wherever the
community is sufficiently advanced to admit of it, a republican
government by universal suffrage and ballot, as a means of selecting and
installing the natural aristocracy. But this part of his doctrine, which
is the part most likely to be assailed with objections, Edition:
current; Page: [152] is unfortunately that which he has taken least
pains to fortify against them. That the people in a democracy would know
where to find the natural aristocracy, or would wish to be governed by
them, is the point to be proved, not assumed. We cannot find that
anything is said to prove it by our author. He thinks, indeed, that the
people cannot themselves govern, but can only choose their governors,
and will prefer, as they must choose somebody, to choose those to whom
they already look up. “Democracy may cause its feelings and opinions to
be attended to and respected, but it can never govern.” [P. 169.] We
think that democracy can govern: it can make its legislators its mere
delegates, to carry into effect its preconceived opinions. We do not say
that it will do so. Whether it will, appears to us the great question
which futurity has to resolve; and on the solution of which it depends
whether democracy will be that social regeneration which its partisans
expect, or merely a new form of bad government, perhaps somewhat better,
perhaps somewhat worse, than those which preceded it.

There seems to be something wavering and undecided in our author’s
conception of what constitutes the test of good government. He
continually enumerates among the requisites of government that it should
be conformable to the opinions of the governed. He insists, as often,
upon another requisite, that the governors shall be the wisest and best
persons in the community. But the wisest and best members of the
community very often would not consent to govern in conformity with the
opinions of the less wise portion: our author must elect, therefore,
which of the two requisites he will in that case dispense with. Perhaps
he will say that, by a government in conformity to the opinions of the
people, he does not mean one which implicitly obeys public opinion, but
one which pays that degree of regard to it as an existing fact, which
the best and wisest government must pay, and which would be paid to any
other fact of equal importance. If so, the test is unexceptionable; but
then, he is on the other horn of the dilemma: is this that kind and
degree of deference to their opinions which a democratic people,
electing their rulers by universal suffrage, will be likely to be
content with?

After all, our author’s practical conclusions fall short of what his
speculative principles would seem to warrant, since he is for
constituting the legislative body of two elective chambers, the one
representative of numbers, the other of property. We believe that this
would be theoretically the best form of government for a state of
society like that of modern Europe; subject to the two conditions, that
it were possible to introduce it, and that, if introduced, it would work
without a civil war between the two houses. Perhaps when the two great
classes, the propertied and non-propertied, shall have tried their
strength and found their inability to conquer one another, this, as a
possible mode of peaceable compromise, may in time suggest itself to the
wiser leaders of both.

Edition: current; Page: [153]


DE TOCQUEVILLE ON DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA [II]
 1840

Edition: current; Page: [154]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Dissertations and Discussions, II (2nd ed.), 1-83, where it is headed
“M. de Tocqueville on Democracy in America,” the title footnoted:
“Edinburgh Review, October 1840.” Reprinted from ER, LXXII (Oct., 1840),
1-47, where it is unsigned, and headed: “Art. I.—1. De la Democratie en
Amérique. Par Alexis de Tocqueville, Membre de l’Institut. 4 vols. 8vo.
Paris: [Gosselin,] 1835-40. / 2. Democracy in America. By Alexis de
Tocqueville, Member of the Institute of France. Translated by Henry
Reeve, Esq., Barrister-at-Law. 4 vols. 8vo. London: [Saunders and
Otley,] 1835-40.” Running title: “Democracy in America.” Identified in
JSM’s bibliography as “A review of Tocqueville’s ‘Democracy in America’
in the Edinburgh Review for October 1840 (No. 145.)” (MacMinn, 52.) In
the copy of the Edinburgh article in the Somerville College Library JSM
has indicated three changes: two of them (see 163t-t and 192x-x, the
latter being a correction of a typographical error) were adopted in the
revised text; the third (164w-w) was further rewritten.

For comment on the composition of this article and JSM’s relations with
Tocqueville, see the Textual Introduction, lxxvi-lxxviii above.

The following text, taken from D&D, II, 2nd ed., is collated with that
in D&D, 1st ed., and that in the Edinburgh. In two places (174-5 and
200-4) JSM adapts parts of his “De Tocqueville on Democracy in America
[I]” and “Duveyrier’s Political Views of French Affairs” (1846); these
passages have been collated with their originals. In the footnoted
variants, “67” indicates D&D, 2nd ed.; “59” indicates D&D, 1st ed.; “40”
indicates Edinburgh Review; “Source” indicates Reeve’s translation of
Tocqueville; “35” indicates “De Tocqueville on Democracy in America
[I]”; and “46” indicates “Duveyrier’s Political Views.”

In the references to De la Démocratie en Amérique, both Reeve’s
translation and the original (identified as Tocqueville) are cited.

Edition: current; Page: [155]


De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [II]

it has been the rare fortune of M. de Tocqueville’s book to have
achieved an easy triumph, both over the indifference of our at once busy
and indolent public to profound speculation, and over the particular
obstacles which oppose the reception of speculations from a foreign, and
above all from a French source. There is some ground for the remark
often made upon us by foreigners, that the character of our national
intellect is insular. The general movement of the European mind sweeps
past us without our being drawn into it, or even looking sufficiently at
it to discover in what direction it is tending; and if we had not a
tolerably rapid original movement of our own, we should long since have
been left in the distance. The French language is almost universally
cultivated on this side of the Channel; a flood of human beings
perpetually ebbs and flows between London and Paris; national prejudices
and animosities are becoming numbered among the things that were; yet
the revolution which has taken place in the tendencies of French
thought, which has changed the character of the higher literature of
France, and almost that of the French language, seems hitherto, as far
as the English public are concerned, to have taken place in vain. At a
time when the prevailing tone of French speculation is one of
exaggerated reaction against the doctrines of the eighteenth century,
French philosophy, with us, is still synonymous with Encyclopedism. The
Englishmen may almost be numbered who are aware that France has produced
any great names in prose literature since Voltaire and Rousseau; and
while modern history has been receiving a new aspect from the labours of
men who are not only among the profoundest thinkers, but the clearest
and most popular writers of their age, even those of their works which
are expressly dedicated to the history of our own country remain mostly
untranslated, and in almost all cases unread.

To this general neglect M. de Tocqueville’s book forms, however, as we
have already said, a brilliant exception. Its reputation was as sudden,
and is as extensive, in this country as in France, and in that large
part of Europe which receives its opinions from France. The progress of
political dissatisfaction, and the comparisons made between the fruits
of a popular constitution on one side of the Atlantic, and of a mixed
government with a preponderating aristocratic element on the other, had
made the working of Edition: current; Page: [156] American institutions
a party question. For many years, every book of travels in America had
been a party pamphlet, or had at least fallen among partisans, and been
pressed into the service of one party or of the other. When, therefore,
a new book, of a grave and imposing character, on Democracy in America,
made its appearance even on the other side of the British Channel, it
was not likely to be overlooked, or to escape an attempt to convert it
to party purposes. If ever political writer had reason to believe that
he had laboured successfully to render his book incapable of such a use,
M. de Tocqueville was entitled to think so. But though his theories are
of an impartiality without example, and his practical conclusions lean
towards Radicalism, some of his phrases are susceptible of a Tory
application. One of these is “the tyranny of the majority.”[*] This
phrase was forthwith adopted into the Conservative dialect, and
trumpeted by Sir Robert Peel in his Tamworth oration, when, as
booksellers’ advertisements have since frequently reminded us, he
“earnestly requested the perusal” of the book by all and each of his
audience.[†] And we believe it has since been the opinion of the country
gentlemen that M. de Tocqueville is one of the pillars of Conservatism,
and his book a definitive demolition of America and of Democracy. The
error has done more good than the truth would perhaps have done; since
the result is, that the English public now know and read the first
philosophical book ever written on Democracy, as it manifests itself in
modern society; a book, the essential doctrines of which it is not
likely that any future speculations will subvert, to whatever degree
they may modify them; while its spirit, and the general mode in which it
treats its subject, constitute it the beginning of a new era in the
scientific study of politics.

The importance of M. de Tocqueville’s speculations is not to be
estimated by the opinions which he has adopted, be these true or false.
The value of his work is less in the conclusions, than in the mode of
arriving at them. He has applied to the greatest question in the art and
science of government, those principles and methods of philosophizing to
which mankind are indebted for all the advances made by modern times in
the other branches of the study of nature. It is not risking too much to
affirm of these volumes, that they contain the first analytical inquiry
into the ainfluences of Democracya. For the first time, that phenomenon
is treated of as something which, being a reality in nature, and no mere
mathematical or metaphysical abstraction, manifests itself by
innumerable properties, not by some one only; and must be looked at in
many aspects before it can be made the subject Edition: current; Page:
[157] even of that modest and conjectural judgment, which is alone
attainable respecting a fact at once so great and so new. Its
consequences are by no means to be comprehended in one single
description, nor in one summary verdict of approval or condemnation. So
complicated and endless are their ramifications, that he who sees
furthest into them willb, in general,b longest hesitate before finally
pronouncing whether the good or the evil of its influence, on the whole,
preponderates.

M. de Tocqueville has endeavoured to ascertain and discriminate the
various properties and tendencies of Democracy, the separate relations
in which it stands towards the different interests of society, and the
different moral and social requisites of human nature. In the
investigation he has cof necessity left much undone,c and much which
will be better done by those who come after him, and build upon his
foundations. But he has earned the double honour of being the first to
make the attempt, and of having done more towards the success of it than
probably will ever again be done by any one individual. His method is,
as that of a philosopher on such a subject must be—a combination of
deduction with induction: his evidences are, laws of human nature, on
the one hand; the example of America, and France, and other modern
nations, so far as applicable, on the other. His conclusions never rest
on either species of evidence alone, whatever he classes as an effect of
Democracy, he has both ascertained to exist in those countries in which
the state of society is democratic, and has also succeeded in connecting
with Democracy by deductions à priori, dtending to showd that such would
naturally be its influences upon beings constituted as mankind are, and
placed in a world such as we know ours to be. If this be not the true
Baconian and Newtonian method applied to society and government; if any
better, or even any other be possible, M. de Tocqueville would be the
first to say, candidus imperti: if not, he is entitled to say to
political theorists, whether calling themselves philosophers or
practical men, his utere mecum.[*]

That part of Democracy in America which was first published, professes
to treat of the political effects of Democracy: the seconde is devoted
to its influence on society in the widest sense; on the relations of
private life, on intellect, morals, and the habits and modes of feeling
which constitute national character. The last is both a newer and a more
difficult subject of inquiry than the first; there are fewer who are
competent, or who will even think themselves competent, to judge M. de
Tocqueville’s conclusions. But, Edition: current; Page: [158] we
believe, no one, in the least entitled to an opinion, will refuse to him
the praise of having probed the subject to a depth which had never
before been sounded; of having carried forward the controversy into a
wider and a loftier region of thought; and pointed out many questions
essential to the subject which had not been before attended to:
questions which he may or may not have solved, but of which, in any
case, he has greatly facilitated the solution.

The comprehensiveness of M. de Tocqueville’s views, and the impartiality
of his feelings, have not led him into the common infirmity of those who
see too many sides to a question—that of thinking them all equally
important. He is able to arrive at a decided opinion. Nor has the more
extensive range of considerations embraced in his Second Part, affected
practically the general conclusions which resulted from his First. They
may be stated as follows:—That Democracy, in the modern world, is
inevitable; and that it is on the whole desirable; but desirable only
under certain conditions, and those conditions capable, by human care
and foresight, of being realized, but capable also of being missed. The
progress and ultimate ascendancy of the democratic principle has in his
eyes the character of a law of nature. He thinks it an inevitable result
of the tendencies of a progressive civilization; by which expressions he
by no means intends to imply either praise or censure. No human effort,
no accident even, unless one which should throw back civilization
itself, can avail, in his opinion, to defeat, or even very considerably
to retard, this progress. But though the fact itself appears to him
removed from human control, its salutary or baneful consequences do not.
Like other great powers of nature, the tendency, though it cannot be
counteracted, may be guided to good. Man cannot turn back the rivers to
their source;[*] but it rests with himself whether they shall fertilize
or lay waste his fields. Left to its spontaneous course, with nothing
done to prepare before it that set of circumstances under which it can
exist with safety, and to fight against its worse by an apt employment
of its better peculiarities, the probable effects of Democracy upon
human well-being, and upon whatever is best and noblest in human
character, appear to M. de Tocqueville extremely formidable. But with as
much of wise effort devoted to the purpose as it is not irrational to
hope for, most of what is mischievous in its tendencies may, in his
opinion, be corrected, and its natural capacities of good so far
strengthened and made use of, as to leave no cause for regret in the old
state of society, and enable the new one to be contemplated with calm
contentment, if without exultation.

It is necessary to observe that by Democracy M. de Tocqueville does not
in general mean any particular form of government. He can conceive a
Democracy under an absolute monarch. Nay, he entertains no small dread
Edition: current; Page: [159] lest in some countries it should actually
appear in that form. By Democracy, M. de Tocqueville understands
equality of conditions; the absence of all aristocracy, whether
constituted by political privileges, or by superiority in individual
importance and social power. It is towards Democracy in this sense,
towards equality between man and man, that he conceives society to be
irresistibly tending. fTowardsf Democracy in the other, and more common
sense, it may or may not be travelling. Equality of conditions tends
naturally to produce a popular government, but not necessarily. Equality
may be equal freedom, or equal servitude. America is the type of the
first; France, he thinks, is in danger of falling into the second. The
latter country is in the condition which, of all that civilized
societies are liable to, he regards with the greatest alarm—a democratic
state of society without democratic institutions. For, in democratic
institutions, M. de Tocqueville sees not an aggravation, but a
corrective, of the most serious evils incident to a democratic state of
society. No one is more opposed than he is to that species of democratic
radicalism, which would admit at once to the highest of political
franchises, untaught masses who have not yet been experimentally proved
fit even for the lowest. But the ever-increasing intervention of the
people, and of all classes of the people, in their own affairs, he
regards as a cardinal maxim in the modern art of government: and he
believes that the nations of civilized Europe, though not all equally
advanced, are all advancing, towards a condition in which there will be
no distinctions of political rights, no great or very permanent
distinctions of hereditary wealth; when, as there will remain no classes
nor individuals capable of making head against the government, unless
all are, and are fit to be, alike citizens, all will ere long be equally
slaves.

The opinion that there is this irresistible tendency to equality of
conditions, is, perhaps, of all the leading doctrines of the book, that
which most stands in need of confirmation to English readers. M. de
Tocqueville devotes but little space to the elucidation of it. To French
readers, the historical retrospect upon which it rests is familiar; and
facts known to every one establish its truth, so far as relates to that
country. But to the English public, who have less faith in irresistible
tendencies, and who, while they require for every political theory an
historical basis, are far less accustomed to link together the events of
history in a connected chain, the proposition will hardly seem to be
sufficiently made out. Our author’s historical argument is, however,
deserving of their attention.

Let us recollect the situation of France seven hundred years ago, when
the territory was divided amongst a small number of families, who were
the owners of the soil and the rulers of the inhabitants: the right of
governing descended with the family inheritance from generation to
generation; force was the only Edition: current; Page: [160] means by
which man could act on man; and landed property was the sole source of
power.

Soon, however, the political power of the clergy was founded, and began
to extend itself: the clergy opened its ranks to all classes, to the
poor and the rich, the villein and the lord; equality penetrated into
the government through the church, and the being who as a serf must have
vegetated in perpetual bondage, took his place as a priest in the midst
of nobles, and not unfrequently above the heads of kings.

The different relations of men became more complicated and more
numerous, as society gradually became more stable and more civilized.
Thence the want of civil laws was felt; and the order of legal
functionaries soon rose from the obscurity of gtheirg tribunals and
their dusty chambers, to appear at the court of the monarch, by the side
of the feudal barons in their ermine and their mail.

Whilst the kings were ruining themselves by their great enterprises, and
the nobles exhausting their resources by private wars, the lower orders
were enriching themselves by commerce. The influence of money began to
be perceptible in state affairs. The transactions of business opened a
new road to power, and the financier rose to a station of political
influence, in which he was at once flattered and despised.

Gradually the spread of mental acquirements, and the increasing taste
for literature and the arts, opened chances of success to talent,
knowledge became a means of government, intelligence became a social
power, and the man of letters took a part in the affairs of the state.

The value attached to the privileges of birth decreased, in the exact
proportion in which new paths were struck out to advancement. In the
eleventh century nobility was beyond all price; in the thirteenth it
might be purchased: it was conferred for the first time in 1270; and
equality was thus introduced into the government through aristocracy
itself.

In the course of these seven hundred years, it sometimes happened that,
in order to resist the authority of the crown, or to diminish the power
of their rivals, the nobles granted a certain share of political rights
to the people. Or, more frequently, the king permitted the inferior
orders to enjoy a degree of power, with the intention of lowering the
aristocracy.

As soon as land was held on any other than a feudal tenure, and personal
property began in its turn to confer influence and power, every
improvement which was introduced in commerce or manufactures was a fresh
element ofh equality of conditions. Henceforward every new discovery,
every new want which igrew upi, and every new desire which craved
satisfaction, was a step towards the universal level. The taste for
luxury, the love of war, the sway of fashion, the most superficial as
well as the deepest passions of the human heart, co-operated to enrich
the poor and to impoverish the rich.

From the time when the exercise of the intellect became a source of
jpowerj and of wealth, it is impossible not to consider every addition
to science, every fresh truth, every new idea, as a germ of power placed
within the reach of the people. Poetry, eloquence, and memory, the grace
of wit, the glow of imagination, the depth of thought, and all the gifts
which are bestowed by Providence without respect of persons, turned to
the advantage ofk democracy; and even Edition: current; Page: [161] when
they were in the possession of its adversaries, they still served its
cause, by lbringingl into relief the natural greatness of man; its
conquests spread, therefore, with those of civilization and knowledge;
and literature became an arsenal, where the poorest and the weakest
could always find weapons to their hand.

In perusing the pages of our history, we shall scarcely meet with a
single great event, in the lapse of seven hundred years, which has not
turned to the advantage of equality.

The Crusades, and the wars with the English, decimated the nobles and
divided their possessions; the erection of corporate towns introduced an
element of democratic liberty into the bosom of feudal monarchy; the
invention of fire-arms equalized the villein and the noble on the field
of battle; printing opened the same resources to the minds of all
classes; the post was established, so as to bring the same information
to the door of the poor man’s cottage and to the gate of the palace; and
Protestantism proclaimed that all men are alike able to find the road to
heaven. The discovery of America offered a thousand new paths to
fortune, and placed riches and power within the reach of the adventurous
and the obscure.

If we examine what mwas happeningm in France at intervals of fifty
years, beginning with the eleventh century, we shall invariably perceive
that a twofold revolution has taken place in the state of society. The
noble has gone down on the social ladder, and the roturier has gone up;
the one descends as the other rises. Every half century brings them
nearer to each other.

Nor is this phenomenon at all peculiar to France Whithersoever we turn
our eyes, we witness the same continual revolution throughout the whole
of Christendom.

Everywhere the various occurrences of national existence have turned to
the advantage of democracy; all men have aided it by their nexertions.
Thosen who have intentionally laboured in its cause, and those who have
served it unwittingly; those who have fought for it, and those who have
declared themselves its opponents—have all been driven along in the same
otracko, have all laboured to one end, some ignorantly and some
unwillingly; all have been blind instruments in the hands of God.

The gradual development of the equality of conditions is therefore a
providential fact, and possesses all the characteristics of a Divine
decree; it is universal, it is durable, it constantly eludes all human
interference, and all events as well as all men contribute to its
progress.

Would it be wise to imagine that a social impulse which dates from so
far back, can be checked by the efforts of a generation? Is it credible
that the democracy which has annihilated the feudal system, and
vanquished kings, will respect the pbourgeoisp and the capitalist? Will
it stop now that it is grown so strong, and its adversaries so weak?

It is not necessary that God himself should speak, in order to disclose
to us the unquestionable signs of his will. We can discern them in the
habitual course of nature, and in the invariable tendency of events.

The Christian nations of our age seem to me to present a most alarming
spectacle. The impulse which is bearing them along is so strong that it
cannot be stopped, but it is not yet so rapid that it cannot be guided.
Their fate is in their Edition: current; Page: [162] hands; yet a little
while, and it may be so no longer.

(Introduction to the First Part.) [Reeve, Vol. I, pp. xv-xxii;
Tocqueville, Vol. I, pp. 4-10.]q

That such has been the actual course of events in modern history, nobody
can doubt, and as truly in England as in France. Of old, every
proprietor of land was sovereign over its inhabitants, while the
cultivators could not call even their bodily powers their own. It was by
degrees only, and in a succession of ages, that their personal
emancipation was effected, and their labour became theirs, to sell for
whatever they could obtain for it. They became the rich men’s equals in
the eye of the law; but the rich had still the making of the law, and
the administering of it; and the equality was at first little more than
nominal. The poor, however, could now acquire property; the path was
open to them to quit their own class for a higher; their rise even to a
considerable station, gradually became a common occurrence; and to those
who acquired a large fortune, the other powers and privileges of
aristocracy were successively opened, until hereditary honours have
become less a power in themselves, than a symbol and ornament of great
riches. While individuals thus continually rose from the mass, the mass
itself multiplied and strengthened; the towns obtained a voice in public
affairs; the many, in the aggregate, became even in property more and
more a match for the few; and the nation became a power, distinct from
the small number of individuals who once disposed even of the crown, and
determined all public affairs at their pleasure. The Reformation was the
dawn of the government of public opinion. Even at that early period,
opinion was not formed by the higher classes exclusively; and while the
publicity of all rStater transactions, the liberty of petition and
public discussion, the press—and of late, above all, the periodical
press—have rendered public opinion more and more the supreme power, the
same causes have rendered the formation of it less and less dependent
upon the initiative of the higher ranks. Even the direct participation
of the people at large in the government had, in various ways, been
greatly extended, before the political events of the last few years,
when democracy has given so signal a proof of its progress in society,
by the inroads it has been able to make into the political constitution.
And in spite of the alarm which has been taken by the possessors of
large property, who are far more generally opposed than they had been
within the present generation to any additional strengthening of the
popular element in the House of Commons, there is at this moment a much
stronger party for a further parliamentary reform, than many good
observers thought there was, twelve years ago, for that which has
already taken place.

Edition: current; Page: [163]
But there is a surer mode of deciding the point than any historical
retrospect. Let us look at the powers which are even now at work in
society itself.

To a superficial glance at the condition of our own country, nothing can
seem more unlike any tendency to equality of condition. The inequalities
of property are apparently greater than in any former period of history.
Nearly all the land is parcelled out in great estates, among
comparatively few families; and it is not the large, but the small
properties, which are in process of extinction. A hereditary and titled
nobility, more potent by their vast possessions than by their social
precedency, are constitutionally and really one of the great powers in
the state. To form part of their order is sthat whichs every ambitious
man aspires ttot, as the crowning glory of a successful career. The
passion for equality of which M. de Tocqueville speaks almost as if it
were the great moral lever of modern times, is hardly known in this
country even by name. On the contrary, all ranks seem to have a passion
for inequality. The hopes of every person are directed to rising in the
world, not to pulling the world down to him. The greatest enemy of the
political conduct of the House of Lords, submits to their superiority of
rank as he would to the ordinances of nature; and often thinks any
amount of toil and watching repaid by a nod of recognition from one of
their number.

We have put the case as strongly as it could be put by an adversary, and
have stated as facts some things which, if they have been facts, are
giving visible signs that they will not always be so. If we look back
even twenty years, we shall find that the popular respect for the higher
classes is by no means the thing it was; and uthoughu all who are rising
wish for the continuance of advantages which they themselves hope to
share, there are among those who do not expect to rise, increasing
indications that a levelling spirit is abroad, and political
discontents, in whatever manner originating, show an increasing tendency
to take that shape. But it is the less necessary to dwell upon these
things, as well shall be satisfied with making out, in respect to the
tendency to equality in England, much less than M. de Tocqueville
contends for. We do not maintain that the time is drawing near when
there will be no distinction of classes; but we do contend that the
power of the higher classes, both in government and in society, is
diminishing; while that of the middle and even the lower classes is
increasing, and likely to increase.

The constituent elements of political importance are property,
intelligence, and the power of combination. In every one of these
elements, is it the higher classes, or the other vportionsv of society,
that have lately made and are continuing to make the most rapid
advances?

Edition: current; Page: [164]
Even with regard to the element of property, there cannot be room for
more than a momentary doubt. The class who are rich by inheritance, are
so far from augmenting their fortunes, that it is much if they can be
said to keep them up. A territorial aristocracy always live up to their
means—generally beyond them. Our own is no exception to the rule; and as
their control over the taxes becomes every day more restricted, and the
liberal professions more overcrowded, they are condemned more and more
to bear the burden of their own large families; which wit is not easy to
do, compatibly with leavingw to the heir the means of keeping up,
without becoming embarrassed, the old family establishments. It is
matter of notoriety how severely the difficulty of providing for younger
sons is felt even in the highest rank; and that, as a provision for
daughters, alliances are now courted which would not have been endured a
generation ago. The additions to the “money-power” of the higher ranks,
consist of the riches of the novi homines[*] who are continually
aggregated to that class from among the merchants and manufacturers, and
occasionally from the professions. But many of these are merely
successors to the impoverished owners of the land they buy; and the
fortunes of others are taken, in the way of marriage, to pay off the
mortgages of older families. Even with these allowances, no doubt the
number of wealthy persons is steadily on the increase; but what is this
to the accumulation of capitals and growth of incomes in the hands of
the middle class? It is that class which furnishes all the accessions to
the aristocracy of wealth; and for one who makes a large fortune, fifty
acquire, without exceeding, a moderate competency, and leave their
children to work, like themselves, at the labouring oar.

In point of intelligence, it can still less be affirmed that the higher
classes maintain the same proportional ascendancy as of old. They have
shared with the rest of the world in the diffusion of information. They
have improved, like all other classes, in the decorous virtues. Their
humane feelings and refined tastes form in general a striking contrast
to the coarse habits of the same class a few generations ago. But it
would be difficult to point out what new idea in speculation, what
invention or discovery in the practical arts, what useful institution,
or what permanently valuable book. Great Britain has owed for the last
hundred years to her hereditary aristocracy, titled or untitled;*—what
great public enterprise, what important national movement in religion or
politics, those classes have originated, or xhave so much as Edition:
current; Page: [165] taken in itx the principal share. Considered in
respect to active energies and laborious habits, to the stirring
qualities which fit men for playing a considerable part in the affairs
of mankind, few will say that our aristocracy have not deteriorated. It
is, on the other hand, one of the commonplaces of the age, that
knowledge and intelligence are spreading, in a degree which was formerly
thought impossible, to the lower, and down even to the lowest rank. And
this is a fact, not accomplished, but in the mere dawn of its
accomplishment, and which has shown hitherto but a slight promise of its
future fruits. It is easy to scoff at the kind of intelligence which is
thus diffusing itself; but it is intelligence still. The knowledge which
is power, is not the highest description of knowledge only: any
knowledge which gives the habit of forming an opinion, and the capacity
of expressing that opinion, constitutes a political power; and if
combined with the capacity and habit of acting in concert, a formidable
one.

It is in this last element, the power of combined action, that the
progress of the Democracy has been the most gigantic. What combination
can do has been shown by an experiment, of now many years duration,
among a people the most backward in civilization (thanks to English
misgovernment) between the Vistula and the Pyrenees. Even on this side
of the Irish Channel we have seen something of what could be done by
Political Unions, Anti-Slavery Societies, and the like; to say nothing
of the less advanced, but already powerful organization of the working
classes, the progress of which has been suspended only by the temporary
failure arising from the manifest impracticability of its present
objects. And these various associations are not the machinery of
democratic combination, but the occasional weapons which that spirit
forges as it needs them. The real Political Unions of England are the
Newspapers. It is these which tell every person what all other persons
are feeling, and in what manner they are ready to act: it is by these
that the people learn, it may truly be said, their own wishes, and
through these that they declare them. The newspapers and the railroads
are solving the problem of bringing the democracy of England to vote,
like that of Athens, simultaneously in one agora; and the same agencies
are rapidly effacing those local distinctions which rendered one part of
our population strangers to another; and are making us more than ever
(what is the first condition of a powerful public opinion) a homogeneous
people. If America has been said to prove that in an extensive country a
popular government may exist, England seems destined to afford the proof
that after a certain stage in civilization it must; for as soon as the
numerically stronger have the same advantages, in means of combination
and celerity of movement, as the smaller number, they are the masters;
and, except by their permission, no government can any longer exist.

It may be said, doubtless, that though the aristocratic class may be no
longer in the ascendant, the power by which it is succeeded is not that
of the Edition: current; Page: [166] numerical majority; that the middle
class in this country is as little in danger of being outstripped by the
democracy below, as of being kept down by the aristocracy above; and
that there can be no difficulty for that class, aided as it would be by
the rich, in making head by its property, intelligence, and power of
combination, against any possible growth of those elements of importance
in the inferior classes; and in excluding the mass of mere manual
labourers from any share in political rights, unless such a restricted
and subordinate one as may be found compatible with the complete
ascendancy of property.

We are disposed partially to agree in this opinion. Universal suffrage
is never likely to exist yand maintain itselfy where the majority are
prolétaires; and we are not unwilling to believe that a labouring class
in abject poverty, like za greatz part of our rural population, or which
expends its surplus earnings in gin or in waste, like so much of the
better paid population of the towns, may be kept politically in
subjection, and that the middle classes are safe from the permanent rule
of such a body, though perhaps not from its Swing outrages, or Wat Tyler
insurrections. But this admission leaves the fact of a tendency towards
democracy practically untouched. There is a democracy short of pauper
suffrage; the working classes themselves contain a middle as well as a
lowest class. Not to meddle with the vexata quæstio, whether the lowest
class is or is not improving in condition, it is certain that a larger
and larger body of manual labourers are rising above that class, and
acquiring at once decent wages and decent habits of conduct. A rapidly
increasing multitude of our working people are becoming, in point of
condition and habits, whata the American working people are. And if our
boasted improvements are of any worth, there must be a growing tendency
in society and government to make this condition of the labouring
classes the general one. The nation must be most slenderly supplied with
wisdom and virtue, if it cannot do something to improve its own physical
condition, to say nothing of its moral. It is something gained, that
well-meaning persons of all parties now at length profess to have this
end in view. But in proportion as it is approached to—in proportion as
the working class becomes, what all proclaim their desire that it should
be—well paid, well taught, and well conducted; in the same proportion
will the opinions of that class tell, according to its numbers, upon the
affairs of the country. Whatever portion of the class succeeds in thus
raising itself, becomes a part of the ruling body; and if the suffrage
be necessary to make it so, it will not be long without the suffrage.

Meanwhile, we are satisfied if it be admitted, that the government of
Edition: current; Page: [167] England is progressively changing from the
government of a few, to the government, not indeed of the many, but of
many;—from an aristocracy with a popular infusion, to the régime of the
middle class. To most purposes, in the constitution of modern society,
the government of a numerous middle class is democracy. Nay, it not
merely is democracy, but the only democracy of which there is yet any
example; what is called universal suffrage in America arising from the
fact that America is all middle class; the whole people being in a
condition, both as to education and pecuniary means, corresponding to
the middle class here. The consequences which we would deduce from this
fact will appear presently, when we examine M. de Tocqueville’s view of
the moral, social, and intellectual influences of democracy. This cannot
be done until we have briefly stated his opinions on the purely
political branch of the question. To this part of our task we shall now
proceed; with as much conciseness as is permitted by the number and
importance of the ideas which, holding an essential place among the
grounds of his general conclusions, have a claim not to be omitted even
from the most rapid summary.

We have already intimated that M. de Tocqueville recognises such a thing
as a democratic state of society without a democratic government; a
state in which the people are all equal, and subjected to one common
master, who selects indiscriminately from all of them the instruments of
his government. In this sense, as he remarks, the government of the
Pasha of Egypt is a specimen of democracy; and to this type (with
allowance for difference of civilization and manners) he thinks that all
nations are in danger of approximating, in which the equalization of
conditions has made greater progress than the spirit of liberty.[*] Now,
this he holds to be the condition of France. The kings of France have
always been the greatest of levellers; Louis XI, Richelieu, Louis XIV,
alike laboured to break the power of the noblesse, and reduce all
intermediate classes and bodies to the general level. After them came
the Revolution, bringing with it the abolition of hereditary privileges,
the emigration and dispossession of half the great landed proprietors,
and the subdivision of large fortunes by the revolutionary law of
inheritance. While the equalization of conditions was thus rapidly
reaching its extreme limits, no corresponding progress of public spirit
was taking place in the people at large. No institutions capable of
fostering an interest in the details of public affairs were created by
the Revolution: it swept away even those which despotism had spared; and
if it admitted a portion of the population to a voice in the government,
gave it them only on the greatest but rarest occasion—the election of
the great council of the state. A political act, to be done only once in
a few years, and for which nothing in the daily habits of the citizen
has prepared him, leaves his intellect and moral dispositions very
Edition: current; Page: [168] much as it found them; and the citizens
not being encouraged to take upon themselves collectively that portion
of the business of society which had been performed by the privileged
classes, the central government easily drew to itself not only the whole
local administration, but much of what, in countries like ours, is
performed by associations of individuals. Whether the government was
revolutionary or counter-revolutionary made no difference; under the one
and the other, everything was done for the people, and nothing by the
people. In France, consequently, the arbitrary power of the magistrate
in detail is almost without limit. And when of late some attempts have
been made to associate a portion of the citizens in the management of
local affairs, comparatively few have been found, even among those in
good circumstances, (anywhere but in the large towns,) who could be
induced willingly to take any part in that management; who, when they
had no personal object to gain, felt the public interest sufficiently
their own interest, not to grudge every moment which they withdrew from
their occupations or pleasures to bestow upon it. With all the eagerness
and violence of party contests in France, a nation more passive in the
hands of any one who is uppermost does not exist. M. de Tocqueville has
no faith in the virtues, nor even in the prolonged existence, of a
superficial love of freedom, in the face of a practical habit of
slavery; and the question whether the French are to be a free people,
depends, in his opinion, upon the possibility of creating a spirit and a
habit of local self-government.

M. de Tocqueville sees the principal source and security of American
freedom, not so much in the election of btheb President and Congress by
popular suffrage, as in the administration of nearly all the business of
society by the people themselves. This it is which, according to him,
keeps up the habit of attending to the public interest, not in the gross
merely, or on a few momentous occasions, but in its dry and troublesome
details. This, too, it is which enlightens the people; which teaches
them by experience how public affairs must be carried on. The
dissemination of public business as widely as possible among the people,
is, in his opinion, the only means by which they can be fitted for the
exercise of any share of power over the legislature; and generally also
the only means by which they can be led to desire it.

For the particulars of this education of the American people by means of
political institutions, we must refer to the work itself; of which it is
one of the minor recommendations, that it has never been equalled even
as a mere statement and explanation of the institutions of the United
States. The general principle to which M. de Tocqueville has given the
sanction of his authority, merits more consideration than it has yet
received from the professed labourers in the cause of national
education. It has often been said, and requires to be repeated still
oftener, that books and discourses alone are Edition: current; Page:
[169] not education; that life is a problem, not a theorem: that action
can only be learnt in action. A child learns to write its name only by a
succession of trials; and is a man to be taught to use his mind and
guide his conduct by mere precept? What can be learnt in schools is
important, but not all-important. The main branch of the education of
human beings is their habitual employment; which must be either their
individual vocation, or some matter of general concern, in which they
are called to take a part. The private money-getting occupation of
almost every one is more or less a mechanical routine; it brings but few
of his faculties into action, while its exclusive pursuit tends to
fasten his attention and interest exclusively upon himself, and upon his
family as an appendage of himself; making him indifferent to the public,
to the more generous objects and the nobler interests, and, in his
inordinate regard for his personal comforts, selfish and cowardly.
Balance these tendencies by contrary ones; give him something to do for
the public, whether as a vestryman, a juryman, or an elector; and, in
that degree, his ideas and feelings are taken out of this narrow circle.
He becomes acquainted with more varied business, and a larger range of
considerations. He is made to feel that besides the interests which
separate him from his fellow-citizens, he has interests which connect
him with them, that not only the common weal is his weal, but that it
partly depends upon his exertions. Whatever might be the case in some
other constitutions of society, the spirit of a commercial people will
be, we are persuaded, essentially mean and slavish, wherever public
spirit is not cultivated by an extensive participation of the people in
the business of government in detail; nor will the desideratum of a
general diffusion of intelligence among either the middle or lower
classes be realized, but by a corresponding dissemination of public
functions and a voice in public affairs.

Nor is this inconsistent with obtaining a considerable share of the
benefits (and they are great) of what is called centralization. The
principle of local self-government has been undeservedly discredited, by
being associated with the agitation against the new poor-law.[*] The
most active agency of a central authority in collecting and
communicating information, giving advice to the local bodies, and even
framing general rules for their observance, is no hindrance, but an aid,
to making the local liberties an instrument of educating the people. The
existence of such a central agency allows of intrusting to the people
themselves, or to local bodies representative of them, many things of
too great national importance to be committed unreservedly to the
localities; and completes the efficacy of local self-government as a
means of instruction, by accustoming the people not only to judge of
particular facts, but to understand, and apply, and feel practically the
value of, principles. The mode of administration provided for the
English poor-laws by Edition: current; Page: [170] the late Act seems to
us to be in its general conception almost theoretically perfect. And the
extension of a similar mixture of central and local management to
several other branches of administration, thereby combining the best
fruits of popular intervention with much of the advantage of skilled
supervision and traditional experience, would, we believe, be entitled
to no mean rank in M. de Tocqueville’s list of correctives to the
inconveniences of cDemocracyc.

In estimating the effects of ddemocratic governmentd as distinguished
from a edemocratic condition of societye. M. de Tocqueville assumes the
state of circumstances which exists in America—a popular government in
the fStatef, combined with popular local institutions. In such a
government he sees great advantages, balanced by no inconsiderable
evils.

Among the advantages, one which figures in the foremost rank is that of
which we have just spoken, the diffusion of intelligence; the remarkable
impulse given by democratic institutions to the active faculties of that
portion of the community who in other circumstances are the most
ignorant, passive, and apathetic. These are characteristics of America
which strike all travellers. Activity, enterprise, and a respectable
amount of information, are not the qualities of a few among the American
citizens, nor even of many, but of all. There is no class of persons who
are the slaves of habit and routine. Every American will carry on his
manufacture, or cultivate his farm, by the newest and best methods
applicable to the circumstances of the case. The poorest American
understands and can explain the most intricate parts of his country’s
institutions; can discuss her interests, internal and foreign. Much of
this may justly be attributed to the universality of easy circumstances,
and to the education and habits which the first settlers in America
brought with them; but our author is certainly not wrong in ascribing a
certain portion of it to the perpetual exercise of the faculties of
every man among the people, through the universal practice of submitting
all public questions to his judgment.

It is incontestable that the people frequently conduct public business
very ill; but it is impossible that the people should take a part in
public business without extending the circle of their ideas, and without
quitting the ordinary routine of their mental goccupationsg. The
humblest individual who is called upon to co-operate in the government
of society, acquires a certain degree of self-respect; and, as he
possesses power, minds more enlightened than his own offer him their
services. He is canvassed by a multitude of claimants who need his
support; and who, seeking to deceive him in a thousand different ways,
instruct him hduring the Edition: current; Page: [171] processh. He
takes a part in political undertakings which did not originate in his
own conception, but which give him a igeneral taste for such
undertakingsi. New ameliorations are daily suggested to him in the
property which he holds in common with others, and this gives him the
desire of improving that property which is peculiarly his own. He is,
perhaps, neither happier nor better than those who came before him; but
he is better informed and more active. I have no doubt that the
democratic institutions of the United States, joined to the physical
constitution of the country, are the cause (not the direct, as is so
often asserted, but the indirect cause) of the prodigious commercial
activity of the inhabitants. It is not engendered by the laws, but it
proceeds from habits acquired through participation in making the laws.

When the opponents of Democracy assert that a single individual performs
the functions which he undertakes better than the government of the
people at large, it appears to me that they are perfectly right. The
government of an individual, supposing an equal degree of instruction on
either side, has more constancy, more perseverance, than that of a
multitude; more combination in its plans, and more perfection in its
details; and is better qualified judiciously to discriminate the
characters of the men it employs. If any deny this, they have never seen
a democratic government, or have formed their opinion only upon a few
instances. It must be conceded that even when local circumstances and
the disposition of the people allow democratic institutions to subsist,
they never display a regular and methodical system of government.
Democratic liberty is far from accomplishing all the projects it
undertakes with the skill of an jintelligentj despotism. It frequently
abandons them before they have borne their fruits, or risks them when
the consequences may prove dangerous; but in the end it produces greater
results than any absolute government. It does fewer things well, but it
does a greater number of things. Not what is done by a democratic
government, but what is done under a democratic government by private
agency, is really great. Democracy does not confer the most skilful kind
of government upon the people, but it produces that which the most
skilful governments are frequently unable to awaken, namely, an
all-pervading and restless activity—a superabundant force—an energy
which is never seen elsewhere, and which may, under favourable
circumstances, beget the most amazing benefits. These are the true
advantages of democracy.

k(Tocqueville, Vol. II, Chap. vi [pp. 130-2].)k

The other great political advantage which our author ascribes to
Democracy, requires less illustration, because it is more obvious, and
has been oftener treated of; that the course of legislation and
administration tends always in the direction of the interest of the
lgreatestl number. Although M. de Tocqueville is far from considering
this quality of Democracy as the mpanaceam in politics which it has
sometimes been supposed to be, he expresses his sense of its importance,
if in measured, in no undecided terms. America does not exhibit to us
what we see in the best mixed constitutions—the class interests of small
minorities wielding the powers of legislation, in Edition: current;
Page: [172] opposition both to the general interest and to the general
opinion of the community; still less does she exhibit what has been
characteristic of most representative governments, and is only gradually
ceasing to characterize our own—a standing league of class interests—a
tacit compact among the various knots of men who profit by abuses, to
stand by one another in resisting reform. Nothing can subsist in America
that is not recommended by arguments which, in appearance at least,
address themselves to the interest of the many. However frequently,
therefore, that interest may be mistaken, the direction of legislation
towards it is maintained in the midst of the mistakes; and if a
community is so situated or so ordered that it can “support the
transitory action of bad laws, and can await without destruction the
result of the general tendency of the laws,” that country, in the
opinion of M. de Tocqueville, will prosper more under a democratic
government than under any other.[*] But in aristocratic governments, the
interest, or at best the honour and glory, of the ruling class, is
considered as the public interest; and all that is most valuable to the
individuals composing the subordinate classes, is apt to be immolated to
that public interest with all the rigour of antique patriotism.

The men who are intrusted with the direction of public affairs in the
United States are frequently inferior, both in point of capacity and of
morality, to those whom aristocratic institutions would raise to power.
But their interest is identified and confounded with that of the
majority of ntheirn fellow-citizens. They may frequently be faithless
and frequently mistaken, but they will never systematically adopt a line
of conduct hostile to the majority; and it is impossible that they
should give a dangerous or an exclusive character to the government.

The mal-administration of a democratic magistrate is, moreover, a mere
isolated fact, the effects of which do not last beyond the short period
for which he is elected. Corruption and incapacity do not act as common
interests, which oconnect men permanently with one another. A corrupt or
an incapable magistrate will not concert his measures with another
magistrate, simply because that individual is corrupt and incapable like
himself; and these two men will never unite their endeavours to promote
or screen the corruption or inaptitude of their remote posterity. The
ambition and the manœuvres of the one will serve, on the contrary, to
unmask the other. The vices of the magistrate in democratic states are
usually those of his individual character.

But, under aristocratic governments, public men are swayed by the
interest of their order, which, if it is sometimes blended with the
interests of the majority, is frequently distinct from them. This
interest is a common and lasting bond which unites them together. It
induces them to coalesce, and combine their efforts towards attaining an
end which is not always the happiness of the greatest number; and it not
only connects the persons in authority with each other, but links them
also to a considerable portion of the governed, since a numerous body of
Edition: current; Page: [173] citizens belongs to the aristocracy,
without being invested with official functions. The aristocratic
magistrate, therefore, finds himself supported in his own natural
tendencies by a portion of society itself, as well as by the government
of which he is a member.

The common object which connects the interest of the magistrates in
aristocracies with that of a portion of their pcotemporariesp,
identifies it also with future generations of their order. They labour
for ages to come as well as for their own time. The aristocratic
magistrate is thus urged towards the same point by the passions of those
who surround him, by his own, and, I might almost say, by those of his
posterity. Is it wonderful that he should not resist? And hence it is
that the class spirit often hurries along with it those whom it does not
corrupt, and makes them unintentionally fashion society to their own
particular ends, and qpre-fashionq it for their descendants.

(Reeve, Vol. II, pp. 118-19; Tocqueville, Vol. II, pp. 111-13.)[*]

These, then, are the advantages ascribed by our author to a democratic
government. We are now to speak of its disadvantages.

According to the opinion which is prevalent among the more cultivated
advocates of democracy, one of its greatest recommendations is that by
means of it the wisest and worthiest are brought to the head of affairs.
The people, it is said, have the strongest interest in selecting the
right men. It is presumed that they will be sensible of that interest;
and, subject to more or less liability of error, will in the main
succeed in placing a high, if not the highest, degree of worth and
talent in the highest situations.

M. de Tocqueville is of another opinion. He was forcibly struck with the
general want of merit in the members of the American legislatures, and
other public functionaries. He accounts for this, not solely by the
people’s incapacity to discriminate merit, but partly also by their
indifference to it. He thinks there is little preference for men of
superior intellect, little desire to obtain their services for the
public; occasionally even a jealousy of them, especially if they be also
rich. They, on their part, have still less inclination to seek any such
employment. Public offices are little lucrative, confer little power,
and offer no guarantee of permanency: almost any other career holds out
better pecuniary prospects to a man of ability and enterprise; nor will
instructed men stoop to those mean arts, and those compromises of their
private opinions, to which their less distinguished competitors
willingly resort. The depositaries of power, after being chosen with
little regard to merit, are, partly perhaps for that very reason,
frequently changed. The rapid return of elections, and even a taste for
variety, M. de Tocqueville thinks, on the part of electors (a taste not
unnatural wherever little regard is paid to qualifications), produces a
rapid succession of new men in the rlegislaturer, and Edition: current;
Page: [174] in all public posts. Hence, on the one hand, great
instability in the laws—every new comer desiring to do something in the
short time she has before hims; while, on the other hand, there is no
political carrière—statesmanship is not a profession. There is no body
of persons educated for public business, pursuing it as their
occupation, and who transmit from one to another the results of their
experience. There are no traditions, no science or art of public
affairs. A functionary knows little, and cares less, about the
principles on which his predecessor has acted; and his successor thinks
as little about his. Public transactions are therefore conducted with a
reasonable share indeed of the common sense and common information which
are general in a democratic community, but with little benefit from
specific study and experience; without consistent system, long-sighted
views, or persevering pursuit of distant objects.

This is likely enough to be a true picture of the American Government,
but can scarcely be said to be peculiar to it: there are now few
governments remaining, whether representative or absolute, of which
something of the same sort might not be said. In no country where the
real government resides in the minister, and where there are frequent
changes of ministry, are far-sighted views of policy likely to be acted
upon; whether the country be England or France, in the eighteenth
century or in the nineteenth.* tuvCrude and ill-considered legislationv
is the character of all governments whose laws are made and acts of
administration performed impromptu, not in pursuance of a general
design, but from the pressure of some present occasion; of all
governments in which the ruling power is to any great extent exercised
by persons not trained to government as a business.u w It is true that
the governments which have been celebrated for their profound policy,
have generally been aristocracies. But they have been very narrow
aristocracies, consisting of so few members, that every member could
personally participate in the business of administration. These are the
governments which have a natural tendency to be administered
steadily—that is, according to fixed principles. Every member of the
governing body being trained to government as a profession, like other
professions they respect precedent, transmit their experience Edition:
current; Page: [175] from generation to generation, acquire and preserve
a set of traditions, and all being competent judges of each other’s
merits, the ablest easily rises to his proper level. The governmentsx of
ancient Rome and modern Venice were of this character; and as all know,
for ages conducted the affairs of those states with admirable constancy
and skill, on fixed principles, often unworthy enough, but always
eminently adapted to the ends of ythosey governments.w zWhen the
governing body, whether it aconsistsa of the many or of a privileged
class, is so numerous, that the large majority of it do not and cannot
make the practice of government the main occupation of their lives, it
isb impossible that there should be wisdom, foresight, and caution in
the governing body itself. These qualities must be found, if found at
all, not in the body, but in those whom the body trust.z cdThed opinion
of a enumerouse ruling class is as fluctuating, as liable to be wholly
given up to immediate impulses, as the opinion of the people. Witness
the whole course of English history. All our laws have been made on
temporary impulses. In fno country has the course of legislation been
less directed to any steady and consistent purpose.fct

gIn so far as it is true that there is a deficiency of remarkable merit
in hAmerican public men (and our author allows that there is a large
number of exceptions), the fact may perhaps admit of a less
discreditable explanation. America needs very little government. She has
no wars, no neighbours, no complicated international relations; no old
society with its thousand abuses to reform; no half-fed and untaught
millions iin want ofi food and guidance. Society in America requires
little but to be let alone. The current affairs which her jgovernmentj
has to transact can seldom demand much more than average capacity; and
it may be in the Americans a wise economy, not to pay the price of great
talents when common ones will serve their purpose. We make these remarks
by way of caution, not of controversy. Like many other parts of our
author’s doctrines, that of which we are now speaking affords work for a
succession of thinkers and of accurate observers, and must in the main
depend on future experience to confirm or refute it.

We now come to that one among the dangers of Democracy, respecting which
so much has been said, and which our author designates as “the despotism
of the majority.”

It is perhaps the greatest defect of M. de Tocqueville’s book, that from
the scarcity of examples, his propositions, even when derived from
observation, Edition: current; Page: [176] have the air of mere abstract
speculations. He speaks of the tyranny of the majority in general
phrases, but gives hardly any instances of it, nor much information as
to the mode in which it is practically exemplified. The omission was in
the present instance the more excusable, as the despotism complained of
was, at that time, politically at least, an evil in apprehension more
than in sufferance; and he was uneasy rather at the total absence of
security against the tyranny of the majority, than at the frequency of
its actual exertion.

Events, however, which have occurred since the publication of the First
Part of M. de Tocqueville’s work, give indication of the shape which
tyranny is most likely to assume when exercised by a majority.

It is not easy to surmise any inducements of interest, by which, in a
country like America, the greater number could be led to oppress the
smaller. When the majority and the minority are spoken of as conflicting
interests, the rich and the poor are generally meant; but where the rich
are content with being rich, and do not claim as such any political
privileges, their interest and that of the poor are kgenerallyk the
same: complete protection to property, and freedom in the disposal of
it, are alike important to both. When, indeed, the poor are so poor that
they can scarcely be worse off, respect on their part for rights of
property which they cannot hope to share, is never safely to be
calculated upon. But where all have property, either in enjoyment or in
reasonable hope, and an appreciable chance of acquiring a large fortune;
and where every man’s way of life proceeds on the confident assurance
that, by superior exertion, he will obtain a superior reward; the
importance of inviolability of property is not likely to be lost sight
of. It is not affirmed of the Americans that they make laws against the
rich, or unduly press upon them in the imposition of taxes. If a
labouring class, less happily circumstanced, could prematurely force
themselves into influence over our own legislature, there might then be
danger, not so much of violations of property, as of undue interference
with contracts; unenlightened legislation for the supposed interest of
the many; laws founded on mistakes in political economy. A minimum of
wages, or a tax on machinery, might be attempted: as silly and as
inefficacious attempts might be made to keep up wages by law, as were so
long made by the British legislature to keep them down by the same
means. We have no wish to see the experiment tried, but we are fully
convinced that experience would correct the one error as it has
corrected the other, and in the same way; namely, by lcompletel
practical failure.

It is not from the separate interests, real or imaginary, of the
majority, that minorities are in danger: but from its antipathies of
religion, political Edition: current; Page: [177] party, or race; and
experience in America seems to confirm what theory rendered probable,
that the tyranny of the majority would not take the shape of tyrannical
laws, but that of a dispensing power over all laws. The people of
Massachusetts passed no law prohibiting Roman Catholic schools, or
exempting Protestants from the penalties of incendiarism; they contented
themselves with burning the Ursuline convent to the ground, aware that
no jury would be found to redress the injury. In the same reliance the
people of New York and Philadelphia sacked and destroyed the houses of
the Abolitionists, and the schools and churches of their black
fellow-citizens, while numbers who took no share in the outrage amused
themselves with the sight. The laws of Maryland still prohibit murder
and burglary; but in 1812, a Baltimore mob, after destroying the
printing office of a newspaper which had opposed the war with England,
broke into the prison to which the editors had been conveyed for safety,
murdered one of them, left the others for dead; and the criminals were
tried and acquitted. In the same city, in 1835, a riot which lasted four
days, and the foolish history of which is related in M. Chevalier’s
Letters,[*] was occasioned by the fraudulent bankruptcy of the Maryland
Bank. It is not so much the riots, in such instances, that are
deplorable; these might have occurred in any country: it is the
impossibility of obtaining aid from an executive dependent on the mob,
or justice from juries which formed part of it: it is the apathetic
cowardly truckling of disapproving lookers-on; almost a parallel to the
passive imbecility of the people of Paris, when a handful of hired
assassins perpetrated the massacres of September. For where the majority
is the sole power, and a power issuing its mandates in the form of
riots, it inspires a terror which the most arbitrary monarch often fails
to excite. The silent sympathy of the majority may support on the
scaffold the martyr of one man’s tyranny; but if we would imagine the
situation of a victim of the majority itself, we must look to the annals
of religious persecution for a parallel.

Yet, neither ought we to forget that even this lawless violence is not
so great, because not so lasting, an evil, as tyranny through the medium
of the law. A tyrannical law remains; because, so long as it is
submitted to, its existence does not weaken the general authority of the
laws. But in America, tyranny will seldom use the instrument of law,
because mthere is in generalm no permanent class to be tyrannized over.
The subjects of oppression are casual objects of popular resentment, who
cannot be reached by law, but only by occasional acts of lawless power;
and to tolerate these, if they ever became frequent, would be consenting
to live without law. Already, in the United States, the spirit of
outrage has raised a spirit of resistance to outrage; Edition: current;
Page: [178] of moral resistance first, as was to be wished and expected:
if that fail, physical resistance will follow. The majority, like other
despotic powers, will be taught by experience that it cannot enjoy both
the advantages of civilized society, and the barbarian liberty of taking
men’s lives and property at its discretion. Let it once be generally
understood that minorities will fight, and majorities will be shy of
provoking them. The bad government of which there is any permanent
danger under modern civilization, is in the form of bad laws and bad
tribunals: government by the sic volo either of a king or a mob belongs
to past ages, and can no more existn, for long together,n out of the
pale of Asiatic barbarism.

The despotism, therefore, of the majority within the limits of civil
life, though a real evil, does not appear to us to be a formidable one.
The tyranny which we fear, and which M. de Tocqueville principally
dreads, is of another kind—a tyranny not over the body, but over the
mind.

It is the complaint of M. de Tocqueville, as well as of other travellers
in America, that in no country does there exist less independence of
thought. In religion, indeed, the varieties of opinion which fortunately
prevailed among those by whom the colonies were settled, ohaveo produced
a toleration in law and in fact extending to the limits of Christianity.
If by ill fortune there had happened to be a religion of the majority,
the case would probably have been different. On every other subject,
when the opinion of the majority is made up, hardly any one, it is
affirmed, dares to be of any other opinion, or at least to profess it.
The statements are not clear as to the nature or amount of the
inconvenience that would be suffered by any one who presumed to question
a received opinion. It seems certain, however, that scarcely any person
has that courage; that when public opinion considers a question as
settled, no further discussion of it takes place; and that not only
nobody dares (what everybody may venture upon in Europe) to say anything
disrespectful to the public, or derogatory to its opinions, but that its
wisdom and virtue are perpetually celebrated with the most servile
adulation and sycophancy.

These considerations, which were much dwelt on in the author’s First
Part, are intimately connected with the views promulgated in his Second,
respecting the influence of Democracy on pintellectp.

The Americans, according to M. de Tocqueville, not only profess, but
carry into practice, on all subjects except the fundamental doctrines of
Christianity and Christian ethics, the habit of mind which has been so
often inculcated as the one sufficient security against mental
slavery—the rejection of authority, and the assertion of the right of
private judgment. They regard Edition: current; Page: [179] the
traditions of the past merely in the light of materials, and as “a
useful study for doing otherwise and better.”[*] They are not accustomed
to look for guidance either to the wisdom of ancestors, or to eminent
qcotemporaryq wisdom, but require that the grounds on which they act
shall be made level to their own comprehension. And, as is natural to
those who govern themselves by common-sense rather than by science,
their cast of mind is altogether unpedantic and practical; they go
straight to the end, without favour or prejudice towards any set of
means, and aim at the substance of things, with something like a
contempt for form.

From such habits and ways of thinking, the consequence which would be
apprehended by some would be a most licentious abuse of individual
independence of thought. The fact risr the reverse. It is impossible, as
our author truly remarks, that mankind in general should form all their
opinions for themselves: an authority from which they mostly derive them
may be rejected in theory, but it always exists in fact. That law above
them, which older societies have found in the traditions of antiquity,
or in the dogmas of priests or philosophers, the Americans find in the
opinions of one another. All being nearly equal in circumstances, and
all nearly alike in intelligence and knowledge, the only authority which
commands an involuntary deference is that of numbers. The more perfectly
each knows himself the equal of every single individual, the more
insignificant and helpless he feels against the aggregate mass, and the
more incredible it appears to him that the opinion of all the world can
possibly be erroneous. “Faith in public opinion,” says M. de
Tocqueville, “becomes in such countries a species of religion, and the
majority its prophet.”[†] The idea that the things which the multitude
believe are still disputable, is no longer kept alive by dissentient
voices; the right of private judgment, by being extended to the
incompetent, ceases to be exercised even by the competent, and
speculation becomes possible only within the limits traced, not as of
old by the infallibility of Aristotle, but by that of “our free and
enlightened citizens,” or “our free and enlightened age.”

On the influence of Democracy upon the cultivation of science and art,
the opinions of M. de Tocqueville are highly worthy of attention. There
are many who, partly from theoretic considerations, and partly from the
marked absence in America of original efforts in literature, philosophy,
or the fine arts, incline to believe that modern democracy is fatal to
them, and that wherever its spirit spreads they will take flight. M. de
Tocqueville is not of this opinion. The example of America, as he
observes, is not to the purpose, because America is, intellectually
speaking, a province of England: a province Edition: current; Page:
[180] in which the great occupation of the inhabitants is making money,
because for that they have peculiar facilities, and are therefore, like
the people of Manchester or Birmingham, for the most part contented to
receive the higher branches of knowledge ready-made from the capital. In
a democratic nation, which is also free, and generally educated, our
author is far from thinking that there will be no public to relish or
remunerate the works of science and genius. Although there will bes
great shifting of fortunes, and no hereditary body of wealthy persons
sufficient to form a class, there will be, he thinks, from the general
activity and the absence of artificial barriers, combined with the
inequality of human intelligence, a far greater number of rich
individuals (infiniment plus nombreux) than in an aristocratic
society.[*] There will be, therefore, though not so complete a leisure,
yet a leisure extending perhaps to more persons; while from the closer
contact and greater mutual intercourse between classes, the love of
intellectual pleasures and occupations will spread downward very widely
among those who have not the same advantages of leisure. Moreover,
ttalentst and knowledge being in a democratic society the only means of
rapid improvement in fortune, they will be, in the abstract at least, by
no means undervalued; whatever measure of them any person is capable of
appreciating, he will also be desirous of possessing. Instead,
therefore, of any neglect of science and literature, the eager ambition
which is universal in such a state of society takes that direction as
well as others, and the number of those who cultivate these pursuits
becomes “immense.”[†]

It is from this fact—from the more active competition in the products of
intellect, and the more numerous public to which they are addressed—that
M. de Tocqueville deduces the defects with which the products themselves
will be chargeable. In the multiplication of their quantity he sees the
deterioration of their quality. Distracted by so great a multitude, the
public can bestow but a moment’s attention on each; they will be
adapted, therefore, chiefly for striking at the moment. Deliberate
approval, and a duration beyond the hour, become more and more difficult
of attainment. What is written for the ujudgmentu of a highly instructed
few, amidst the abundance of writings may very probably never reach
them; and their suffrage, which never gave riches, does not now confer
even glory. But the multitude of buyers affords the possibility of great
pecuniary success and momentary notoriety, for the work which is made up
to please at once, and to please the many. Literature thus becomes not
only a trade, but is carried on by the Edition: current; Page: [181]
maxims usually adopted by other trades which live by the number, rather
than by the quality, of their customers; that much pains need not be
bestowed on commodities intended for the general market, and that what
is saved in the workmanship may be more profitably expended in
self-advertisement. There will thus be an immense mass of third and
fourth-rate productions, and very few first-rate. Even the turmoil and
bustle of a society in which every one is striving to get on, is in
itself, our author observes, not favourable to meditation. “Il règne
dans le sein de ces nations un petit mouvement incommode, une sorte de
roulement incessant des hommes les uns sur les autres, qui trouble et
distrait l’esprit sans l’animer et l’élever.”[*] Not to mention that the
universal tendency to action, and to rapid action, directs the taste to
applications rather than principles, and hasty approximations to truth
rather than scientific accuracy in it.

Passing now from the province of intellect to that of vsentiments and
moralsv, M. de Tocqueville is of opinion that the general softening of
manners, and the remarkable growth, in modern times, of humanity and
philanthropy, are in great part the effect of the gradual progress of
social equality. Where the different classes of mankind are divided by
impassable barriers, each may have intense sympathies with his own
class, more intense than it is almost possible to have with mankind in
general; but those who are far below him in condition are so unlike
himself, that he hardly considers them as human beings; and if they are
refractory and troublesome, will be unable to feel for them even that
kindly interest which he experiences for his more unresisting domestic
cattle. Our author cites a well-known passage of Madame de Sévigné’s
Letters, in exemplification of the want of feeling exhibited even by
good sort of persons towards those with whom they have no
fellow-feeling.[†] In America, except towards the slaves (an exception
which proves the rule,) he finds the sentiments of philanthropy and
compassion almost universal, accompanied by a general kindness of manner
and obligingness of disposition, without much of ceremony and punctilio.
As all feel that they are not above the possible need of the good-will
and good offices of others, every one is ready to afford his own. The
general equality penetrates also into the family relations: there is
more intimacy, he thinks, than in Europe, between parents and children,
but less, except in the earliest years, of paternal authority, and the
filial respect which is founded on it. wThis, however, isw among the
topics which we must omit, as well as the connexion which our author
attempts to trace between equality of conditions Edition: current; Page:
[182] and strictness of domestic morals, and some other remarks on
domestic society in America, which do not appear to us to be of any
considerable value.

M. de Tocqueville is of opinion, that one of the tendencies of a
democratic state of society is to make every one, in a manner, retire
within himself, and concentrate his interests, wishes, and pursuits
within his own business and household.

The members of a democratic community are like the sands of the
seashore, each very minute, and no one adhering to any other. There are
no permanent classes, and therefore no esprit de corps; few hereditary
fortunes, and therefore few local attachments, or outward objects
consecrated by family feeling. A man feels little connexion with his
neighbours, little with his ancestors, little with his posterity. There
are scarcely any ties to connect any two men together, except the common
one of country. Now, the love of country is not, in large communities, a
passion of spontaneous growth. When a man’s country is his town, where
his ancestors have lived for generations, of which he knows every
inhabitant, and has recollections associated with every street and
building—in which alone, of all places on the earth, he is not a
stranger—which he is perpetually called upon to defend in the field, and
in whose glory or shame he has an appreciable share, made sensible by
the constant presence and rivalry of foreigners; in such a state of
things patriotism is easy. It was easy in the ancient republics, or in
modern Switzerland. But in great communities an intense interest in
public affairs is scarcely natural, except to a member of an
aristocracy, who alone has so conspicuous a position, and is so
personally identified with the conduct of the government, that his
credit and consequence are essentially connected with the glory and
power of the nation he belongs to; its glory and power (observe,) not
the well-being of the bulk of its inhabitants. It is difficult for an
obscure person like the citizen of a xdemocracyx, who is in no way
involved in the responsibility of public affairs, and cannot hope to
exercise more than the minutest influence over them, to have the
sentiment of patriotism as a living and earnest feeling. There beingy no
intermediate objects for his attachments to fix upon, they fasten
themselves on his own private affairs; and, according to national
character and circumstances, it becomes his ruling passion either to
improve his condition in life, or to take his ease and pleasure by the
means which it already affords him.

As, therefore, the state of society becomes more democratic, it is more
and more necessary to nourish patriotism by artificial means; and of
these none are so efficacious as free institutions—a large and frequent
intervention of the citizens in the management of public business. Nor
does the love of Edition: current; Page: [183] country alone require
this encouragement, but every feeling which connects men either by
interest or sympathy with their neighbours and fellow-citizens. Popular
institutions are the great means of rendering general in a people, and
especially among the richer classes, the desire of being useful in their
generation; useful to the public, or to their neighbours without
distinction of rank; as well as courteous and unassuming in their
habitual intercourse.

When the public is supreme, there is no man who does not feel the value
of public good-will, or who does not endeavour to court it by drawing to
himself the esteem and affection of those amongst whom he is to live.
Many of the passions which congeal and keep asunder human hearts, are
then obliged to retire, and hide below the surface. Pride must be
dissembled; disdain does not break out; selfishness is afraid of itself.
Under a free government, as most public offices are elective, the men
whose elevated minds or aspiring hopes are too closely circumscribed in
private life, constantly feel that they cannot do without the population
which surrounds them. Men learn at such times to think of their
fellow-men from ambitious motives, and they frequently find it, in a
manner, their interest, to be forgetful of self.

I may here be met by an objection, derived from electioneering
intrigues, the meannesses of candidates, and the calumnies of their
opponents. These are opportunities of animosity which occurz oftener,
the more frequent elections become. Such evils are, doubtless, great,
but they are transient, whereas the benefits which attend them remain.
The desire of being elected may lead some men for a time to mutual
hostility; but this same desire leads all men, in the long run, mutually
to support each other; and if it happens that an election accidentally
severs two friends, the electoral system brings a multitude of citizens
permanently together who would always have remained unknown to each
other. Freedom engenders private animosities, but despotism gives birth
to general indifference. . . .

A brilliant achievement may win for you the favour of a people at one
stroke; but to earn the love and respect of the population which
surrounds you, requires a long succession of little services and obscure
good offices, a constant habit of kindness, and an established
reputation for disinterestedness. Local freedom, then, which leads a
great number of citizens to value the affections of their neighbours,
and of those with whom they are in contact, perpetually draws men back
to one another, in spite of the propensities which sever them; and
forces them to render each other mutual assistance.

In the United States, the more opulent citizens take great care not to
stand aloof from the people, on the contrary, they constantly keep on
easy terms with them; they listen to them; they speak to them every day.
They know that the rich, in democracies, always stand in need of the
poor; and that in democratic times a poor man’s attachment depends more
on manner than on benefits conferred. The very magnitude of such
benefits, by setting the difference of conditions in a strong light,
causes a secret irritation to those who reap advantage from them; but
the charm of simplicity of manners is almost irresistible. . . . This
truth does not penetrate at once into the minds of the rich. They
generally resist it as long as the democratic revolution lasts, and they
do not acknowledge it immediately after that revolution is accomplished.
They are very ready to do good Edition: current; Page: [184] to the
people, but they still choose to keep them at arm’s length; they think
that is sufficient, but they are mistaken. They might spend fortunes
thus, without warming the hearts of the population around them; that
population does not ask them for the sacrifice of their money, but of
their pride.

It would seem as if every imagination in the United States were on the
stretch to invent means of increasing the wealth and satisfying the
wants of the public. The best informed inhabitants of each district are
incessantly using their information to discover new means of augmenting
the general prosperity; and, when they have made any such discoveries,
they eagerly surrender them to the mass of the people. . . .

I have often seen Americans make great and real sacrifices to the public
welfare; and I have a hundred times remarked that, in case of need, they
hardly ever fail to lend faithful support to each other. The free
institutions which the inhabitants of the United States possess, and the
political rights of which they make so much use, remind every citizen,
and in a thousand ways, that he ais a member ofa society. They batb
every instant impress upon his mind the notion that it is the duty as
well as the interest of men to make themselves useful to their
fellow-creatures; and as he sees no particular reason for disliking
them, since he is never either their master or their slave, his heart
readily leans to the side of kindness. Men attend to the interests of
the public, first by necessity, afterwards by choice; what was
calculation becomes an instinct; and, by dint of working for the good of
one’s fellow-citizens, the habit and the taste for serving them is at
length acquired.

Many people in France consider equality of conditions as one evil, and
political freedom as a second. When they are obliged to yield to the
former, they strive at least to escape from the latter. But I contend
that, in order to combat the evils which equality may produce, there is
only one effectual remedy—c political freedom.

d(Tocqueville, Vol. III, Part 2. Chap. iv [pp. 165-70].)d

With regard to the tone of moral sentiment characteristic of democracy,
M. de Tocqueville holds an opinion which we think deserves the attention
of moralists. Among a class composed of persons who have been born into
a distinguished position, the habitual springs of action will be very
different from those of a democratic community. Speaking generally, (and
making abstraction both of individual peculiarities, and of the
influence of moral culture,) it may be said of the first, that their
feelings and actions will be mainly under the influence of pride; of the
latter, under that of interest. Now, as in an aristocratic society the
elevated class, though small in number, sets the fashion in opinion and
feeling, even virtue will, in that state of society, seem to be most
strongly recommended by arguments addressing themselves to pride; in a
democracy, by those which address themselves to self-interest. In the
one, we hear chiefly of the beauty and dignity of virtue, Edition:
current; Page: [185] the grandeur of self-sacrifice; in the other, of
honesty the best policy, the value of character, and the common interest
of every individual in the good of the whole.

Neither the one nor the other of these modes of feeling, our author is
well aware, constitutes moral excellence; which must have a deeper
foundation than either the calculations of self-interest, or the
emotions of self-flattery. But as an auxiliary to that higher principle,
and as far as possible a substitute for it when it is absent, the latter
of the two, in his opinion, though the least sentimental, will stand the
most wear.

The principle of enlightened self-interest is not a lofty one, but it is
clear and sure. It does not aim at mighty objects, but it attains,
without impracticable efforts, all those at which it aims. As it lies
within the reach of all capacities, every one can without difficulty
apprehend and retain it. By its adaptation to human weaknesses, it
easily obtains great dominion; nor is its dominion precarious, since it
employs self-interest itself to correct self-interest, and uses, to
direct the passions, the very instrument which excites them.

The doctrine of enlightened self-interest produces no great acts of
self-sacrifice, but it suggests daily small acts of self-denial. By
itself it cannot suffice to make a virtuous man, but it disciplines a
multitude of citizens in habits of regularity, temperance, moderation,
foresight, self-command; and if it does not at once lead men to virtue
by their will, it draws them gradually in that direction by their
habits. If the principle of “interest rightly understood” were to sway
the whole moral world, extraordinary virtues would doubtless be more
rare; but I think that gross depravity would then also be less common.
That principle, perhaps, prevents some men from rising far above the
level of mankind, but a great number of others, who were falling below
that level, are caught and upheld by it. Observe some few individuals,
they are lowered by it; survey mankind, it is raised.

I am not afraid to say, that the principle of enlightened self-interest
appears to me the best suited of all philosophical theories to the wants
of the men of our time; and that I regard it as their chief remaining
security against themselves. Towards it, therefore, the minds of the
moralists of our age should turn, even should they judge it incomplete,
it must nevertheless be adopted as necessary.

No power upon earth can prevent the increasing equality of conditions
from impelling the human mind to seek out what is useful, or from
inclining every member of the community to concentrate his affections on
himself. It must therefore be expected that personal interest will
become more than ever the principal, if not the sole, spring of men’s
actions; but it remains to be seen how each man will understand his
personal interest.

I do not think that the doctrine of self-interest, as it is professed in
America, is self-evident in all its parts, but it contains a great
number of truths so evident, that men, if they are but instructed,
cannot fail to see them. Instruct them, then, at all hazards; for the
age of implicit self-sacrifice and instinctive virtues is already flying
far away from us, and the time is fast approaching when freedom, public
peace, and social order itself, will not be able to exist without
instruction.

e(Tocqueville, Vol. III, Part 2, Chap. viii [pp. 197-9].)e

Edition: current; Page: [186]
M. de Tocqueville considers a democratic state of society as eminently
tending to give the strongest impulse to the fdesire off physical
well-being. He ascribes this, not so much to the equality of conditions
as to their mobility. In a country like America every one may acquire
riches; no one, at least, is artificially impeded in acquiring them; and
hardly any one is born to them. Now, these are the conditions under
which the passions which attach themselves to wealth, and to what wealth
can purchase, are the strongest. Those who are born in the midst of
affluence are generally more or less gblasésg to its enjoyments. They
take the comfort or luxury to which they have always been accustomed, as
they do the air they hbreathe. Ith is not le but de la vie, but une
manière de vivre. An aristocracy, when put to the proof, has in general
showni wonderful facility in enduring the loss of riches and of physical
comforts. The very pride, nourished by the elevation which they owed to
wealth, supports them under the privation of it. But to those who have
chased riches laboriously for half their lives, to lose it is the loss
of all; une vie manquée; a disappointment greater than can be endured.
In a democracy, again, there is no contented poverty. No one being
forced to remain poor; many who were poor daily becoming rich, and the
comforts of life being apparently within the reach of all, the desire to
appropriate them descends to the very lowest rank. Thus,

The desire of acquiring the comforts of the world haunts the imagination
of the poor, and the dread of losing them that of the rich. Many scanty
fortunes spring up; those who possess them have a sufficient share of
physical gratifications to conceive a taste for those pleasures—not
enough to satisfy it. They never procure them without exertion, and they
never indulge in them without apprehension. They are therefore always
straining to pursue or to retain gratifications so precious, so
incomplete, and so fugitive.

If I inquire what passion is most natural to men who are at once
stimulated and circumscribed by the obscurity of their birth or the
mediocrity of their fortune, I can discover none more peculiarly
appropriate to them than this love of physical prosperity. The passion
for physical comforts is essentially a passion of the middle classes;
with those classes it grows and spreads, and along with them it becomes
preponderant. From them it mounts into the higher orders of society, and
descends into the mass of the people.

I never met in America with any citizen so poor as not to cast a glance
of hope and longing towards the enjoyments of the rich, or whose
imagination did not indulge itself by anticipation in those good things
which fate still obstinately withheld from him.

On the other hand, I never perceived, amongst the wealthier inhabitants
of the United States, that proud contempt of the indulgences of riches,
which is sometimes to be met with even in the most opulent and dissolute
aristocracies. Most of these wealthy persons were once poor; they have
felt the stimulus of privation, they have long struggled with adverse
fortune; and now that the victory is won, Edition: current; Page: [187]
the passions which accompanied the contest have survived it; their minds
are, as it were, intoxicated by the petty enjoyments which they have
pursued for forty years.

Not but that in the United States, as elsewhere, there are a certain
number of wealthy persons, who, having come into their property by
inheritance, possess, without exertion, an opulence they have not
earned. But even these are not less devotedly attached to the pleasures
of material life. The love of physical comfort jhasj become the
predominant taste of the nation; the great current of man’s passions
runs in that channel, and sweeps everything along in its course.

k(Tocqueville, Vol. III, Part 2, Chap. x [pp. 206-7].)k

A regulated sensuality thus lestablishedl itself—the parent of
effeminacy rather than of debauchery; paying respect to the social
rights of other people and to the opinion of the world; not “leading men
away in search of forbidden enjoyments, but absorbing them in the
pursuit of permitted ones. This spirit is frequently combined with a
species of religious morality; men wish to be as well off as they can in
this world, without foregoing their chance of another.”[*]

From the preternatural stimulus given to the desire of acquiring and of
enjoying wealth, by the intense competition which necessarily exists
where an entire population are the competitors, arises the restlessness
so characteristic of American life.

It is strange to see with what feverish ardour the Americans pursue
their own welfare; and to watch the vague dread that constantly torments
them lest they should not have chosen the shortest path which may lead
to it. A native of the United States clings to this world’s goods as if
he were certain never to die, and is so hasty in grasping at all within
his reach, that one would suppose he was constantly afraid of not living
long enough to enjoy them. He clutches everything, he holds nothing
fast, but soon loosens his grasp to pursue fresh gratifications. . . .

At first sight there is something surprising in this strange unrest of
so many happy men, uneasy in the midst of abundance. The spectacle is,
however, as old as the world; the novelty is to see a whole people
furnish an example of it. . . .

When all the privileges of birth and fortune are abolished, when all
professions are accessible to all, and a man’s own energies may place
him at the top of any one of them, an easy and unbounded career seems
open to his ambition, and he will readily persuade himself that he is
born to no vulgar destinies. But this is an erroneous notion, which is
corrected by daily experience. The same equality which allows every
citizen to conceive these lofty hopes, renders all the citizens
individually feeble. It circumscribes their powers on every side, while
it gives freer scope to their desires. Not only are they restrained by
their own weakness, but they are met at every step by immense obstacles
which they did not at first perceive. They have swept away the
privileges of some of their fellow-creatures Edition: current; Page:
[188] which stood in their way; mbut they have nowm to encounter the
competition of all. The barrier has changed its shape rather than its
place. When men are nearly alike, and all follow the same track, it is
very difficult for any one individual to get on fast, and cleave a way
through the homogeneous throng which surrounds and presses upon him.
This constant strife between the wishes springing from the equality of
conditions and the means it supplies to satisfy them, harasses and
wearies the mind.

n(Tocqueville, Vol. III, Part 2, Chap. xiii [pp. 216-19].)n

And hence, according to M. de Tocqueville,o while every one is devoured
by ambition, hardly any one is ambitious on a large scale. Among so many
competitors for but a few great prizes, none of the candidates starting
from the vantage ground of an elevated social position, very few can
hope to gain those prizes, and they not until late in life. Men in
general, therefore, do not look so high. A vast energy of passion in a
whole community is developed and squandered in the petty pursuit of
petty advancements in fortune, and the hurried snatching of petty
pleasures.

To sum up our author’s opinion of the dangers to which mankind are
liable as they advance towards equality of condition; his fear, both in
government and in intellect and morals, is not of too great liberty, but
of too ready submission; not of anarchy, but of servility, not of too
rapid change, but of Chinese stationariness. As democracy advances, the
opinions of mankind on most subjects of general interest will become, he
believes, as compared with any former period, more rooted and more
difficult to change; and mankind are more and more in danger of losing
the moral courage and pride of independence, which make them deviate
from the beaten path, either in speculation or in conduct. Even in
politics, it is to be apprehended plestp, feeling their personal
insignificance, and conceiving a proportionally vast idea of the
importance of society at large, being jealous, moreover, of one another,
but not jealous of the central power which derives its origin from the
majority, or which at least is the faithful representative of its desire
to annihilate every intermediate power—they should allow that central
government to assume more and more control, engross more and more of the
business of society; and, on condition of making itself the organ of the
general mode of feeling and thinking, should suffer it to relieve
mankind from the care of their own interests, and keep them under a kind
of tutelage; trampling meanwhile with considerable recklessness, as
often as convenient, upon the rights of individuals, in the name of
society and the public good.

Against these political evils the corrective to which our author looks
is popular education, and, above all, the spirit of liberty, fostered by
the extension and dissemination of political rights. Democratic
institutions, therefore, Edition: current; Page: [189] are his remedy
for the worst mischiefs to which a democratic state of society is
exposed. As for those to which democratic institutions are themselves
liable, these, he holds, society must struggle with, and bear with so
much of them as it cannot find the means of conquering. For M. de
Tocqueville is no believer in the reality of mixed governments. There
is, he says, always and everywhere, a strongest power: in every
government either the king, the aristocracy, or the people, have an
effective predominance, and can carry any point on which they set their
heart. “When a community really comes to have a mixed government, that
is, to be equally divided between two adverse principles, it is either
falling into a revolutionary state or into dissolution.”[*] M. de
Tocqueville believes that the preponderant power, which must exist
everywhere, is most rightly placed in the body of the people. But he
thinks it most pernicious that this power, whether residing in the
people or elsewhere, should be “checked by no obstacles which may retard
its course, and force it to moderate its own vehemence.”[†] The
difference, in his eyes, is great between one sort of democratic
institutions and another. That form of democracy should be sought out
and devised, and in every way endeavoured to be carried into practice,
which, on the one hand, most exercises and cultivates the intelligence
and mental activity of the majority; and, on the other, breaks the
headlong impulses of popular opinion, by delay, rigour of forms, and
adverse discussion. “The organization and the establishment of
democracy” on these principles “is the great political problem of our
time.”[‡]

And when this problem is solved, there remains an equally serious one;
to make head against the tendency of democracy towards bearing down
individuality, and circumscribing the exercise of the human faculties
within narrow limits. To sustain the higher pursuits of philosophy and
art; to vindicate and protect the unfettered exercise of reason, and the
moral freedom of the individual—these are purposes to which, under a
democracy, the superior spirits, and the government so far as it is
permitted, should devote their utmost energies.

I shall conclude by one general idea, which comprises not only all the
particular ideas which have been expressed in the present chapter, but
also most of those which it is the object of this book to treat of.

In the ages of aristocracy which preceded our own, there were private
persons of great power, and a social authority of extreme weakness. The
principal efforts of the men of those times were required, to
strengthen, aggrandize, and secure the supreme power, and, on the other
hand, to circumscribe individual independence within narrower limits,
and to subject private interests toq public. Other perils and other
cares await the men of our age. Amongst the greater part of Edition:
current; Page: [190] modern nations, the government, whatever may be its
origin, its constitution, or its name, has become almost omnipotent, and
private persons are falling, more and more, into the lowest stage of
weakness and dependence.

The general character of roldr society was diversity; unity and
uniformity were nowhere to be met with. In modern society, all things
threaten to become so much alike, that the peculiar characteristics of
each individual will be entirely lost in the uniformity of the general
aspect. Our forefathers were ever prone to make an improper use of the
notion, that private rights ought to be respected; and we are naturally
prone, on the other hand, to exaggerate the idea, that the interest of
an individual ought to bend to the interest of the many.

The political world is metamorphosed; new remedies must henceforth be
sought for new disorders. To lay down extensive, but distinct and
immovable limits to the action of the ruling power; to confer certain
rights on private persons, and secure to them the undisputed enjoyment
of their rights; to enable individual man to maintain whatever
independence, strength, and originality he still possesses: to raise him
by the side of society at large, and uphold him in that position:—these
appear to me the main objects for the legislator in the age upon which
we are now entering.

It would seem as if the rulers of our time sought only to use men in
order to effect great things: I wish that they would try a little more
to make great men; that they would set less value upon the work, and
more upon the workman; that they would never forget that a nation cannot
long remain strong when every man belonging to it is individually weak:
and that no form or combination of social polity has yet been devised to
make an energetic people, out of a community of citizens personally
feeble and pusillanimous.

s(Tocqueville, Vol. IV, Part 4, Chap. vii [pp. 271-2].)s

If we were here to close this article, and leave these noble
speculations to produce their effect without further comment, the reader
probably would not blame us. Our recommendation is not needed in their
behalf. That nothing on the whole comparable in profundity to them thast
yet been written on uDemocracyu, will scarcely be disputed by any one
who has read even our hasty abridgment of them. We must guard, at the
same time, against attaching to these conclusions, or to any others that
can result from such inquiries, a character of scientific certainty that
can never belong to them. Democracy is too recent a phenomenon, and of
too great magnitude, for any one who now lives to comprehend its
consequences. A few of its more immediate tendencies may be perceived or
surmised; what other tendencies, destined to overrule or to combine with
these, lie behind, there are not grounds even to conjecture. If we
revert to any similar fact in past history, any change in human affairs
approaching in greatness to what is passing before our eyes, we shall
find that no prediction which could have been made at the time, or for
many generations afterwards, would have borne Edition: current; Page:
[191] any resemblance to what has actually been the course of events.
When the Greek commonwealths were crushed, and liberty in the civilized
world apparently extinguished by the Macedonian invaders; when a rude
unlettered people of Italy stretched their conquests and their dominion
from one end to the other of the known world; when that people in turn
lost its freedom and its old institutions, and fell under the military
despotism of one of its own citizens;—what similarity is there between
the effects we now know to have been produced by these causes, and
anything which the wisest person could then have anticipated from them?
When the Roman empire, containing all the art, science, literature, and
industry of the world, was overrun, ravaged, and dismembered by hordes
of barbarians, everybody lamented the destruction of civilization, in an
event which is now admitted to have been the necessary condition of its
renovation. When the Christian religion had existed but for two
centuries—when the Pope was only beginning to assert his ascendancy—what
philosopher or statesman could have foreseen the destinies of
Christianity, or the part which has been acted in history by the
Catholic Church? It is thus with all other really great historical
facts—the invention of gunpowder for instance, or of the printing-press:
even when their direct operation is as exactly measurable, because as
strictly mechanical, as these were, the mere scale on which they operate
gives birth to endless consequences, of a kind which would have appeared
visionary to the most far-seeing vcotemporaryv wisdom.

It is not, therefore, without a deep sense of the uncertainty attaching
to such predictions, that the wise would hazard an opinion as to the
fate of mankind under the new democratic dispensation. But without
pretending to judge confidently of remote tendencies, those immediate
ones which are already developing themselves require to be dealt with as
we treat any of the other circumstances in which we are placed;—by
encouraging those which are salutary, and working out the means by which
such as are hurtful may be counteracted. To exhort men to this, and to
aid them in doing it, is the end for which M. de Tocqueville has
written; and in the same spirit we will now venture to make one
criticism upon him;—to point out one correction, of which we think his
views stand in need; and for want of which they have occasionally an air
of over-subtlety and false refinement, exciting the distrust of common
readers, and making the opinions themselves appear less true, and less
practically important, than, it seems to us, they really are.

M. de Tocqueville, then, has, at least apparently, confounded the
effects of Democracy with the effects of Civilization. He has bound up
in one abstract idea the whole of the tendencies of modern commercial
society, and given them one name—Democracy; thereby letting it be
supposed that he ascribes to equality of conditions, several of the
effects naturally arising Edition: current; Page: [192] from the mere
progress of national prosperity, in the form in which that progress
manifests itself in modern times.

It is no doubt true, that among the tendencies of commercial
civilization, a tendency to the equalization of conditions is one, and
not the least conspicuous. When a nation is advancing in prosperity—when
its industry is expanding, and its capital rapidly augmenting—the number
also of those who possess capital increases in at least as great a
proportion: and though the distance between the two extremes of society
may not be much diminished, there is a rapid multiplication of those who
occupy the intermediate positions. There may be princes at one end of
the scale and paupers at the other; but between them there will be a
respectable and well-paid class of artisans, and a middle class who
combine property and industry. This may be called, and is, a tendency to
equalization. But this growing equality is only one of the features of
progressive civilization; one of the incidental effects of the progress
of industry and wealth: a most important effect, and one which, as our
author shows, re-acts in a hundred ways upon the other effects, but not
therefore to be confounded with the cause.

So far is it, indeed, from being admissible, that mere equality of
conditions is the mainspring of those moral and social phenomena which
M. de Tocqueville has characterized, that when some unusual chance
exhibits to us equality of conditions by itself, severed from that
commercial state of society and that progress of industry of which it is
the natural concomitant, it produces few or none of the moral effects
ascribed to it. Consider, for instance, the French of Lower Canada.
Equality of conditions is more universal there than in the United
States; for the whole people, without exception, are in easy
circumstances, and there are not even that considerable number of rich
individuals who are to be found in all the great towns of the American
Republic. Yet do we find in Canada that wgo-ahead spiritw—that restless,
impatient eagerness xforx improvement in circumstances—that mobility,
that shifting and fluctuating, now up now down, now here now there—that
absence of classes and class-spirit—that jealousy of superior
attainments—that want of deference for authority and leadership—that
habit of bringing things to the rule and square of each man’s own
understanding—which M. de Tocqueville imputes to the same cause in the
United States? In all these respects the very contrary qualities
prevail. We by no means deny that where the other circumstances which
determine these effects exist, equality of conditions has a very
perceptible effect in corroborating them. We think M. de Tocqueville has
shown that it has. But that it is the exclusive, or even the principal
cause, we think the example of Canada goes far to disprove.

Edition: current; Page: [193]
For the reverse of this experiment, we have only to look at home. Of all
countries in a state of progressive commercial civilization, Great
Britain is that in which the equalization of conditions has made least
progress. The extremes of wealth and poverty are wider apart, and there
is a more numerous body of persons at each extreme, than in any other
commercial community. From the habits of the population in regard to
marriage, the poor have remained poor; from the laws which tend to keep
large masses of property together, the rich have remained rich: and
often, when they have lost the substance of riches, have retained its
social advantages and outward trappings. Great fortunes are continually
accumulated, and seldom redistributed. In this respect, therefore,
England is the most complete contrast to the United States. But in
commercial prosperity, in the rapid growth of industry and wealth, she
is the next after America, and not very much inferior to her.
Accordingly we appeal to all competent observers, whether, in nearly all
the moral and intellectual features of American society, as represented
by M. de Tocqueville, this country does not stand next to America?
whether, with the single difference of our remaining respect for
aristocracy, the American people, both in their good qualities and in
their defects, resemble anything so much as an exaggeration of our own
middle class? whether the spirit, which is gaining more and more the
ascendant with us, is not in a very great degree American? and whether
all the moral elements of an American state of society are not most
rapidly growing up?

For example, that entire unfixedness in the social position of
individuals—that treading upon the heels of one another—that habitual
dissatisfaction of each with the position he occupies, and eager desire
to push himself into the next above it—has not this become, and is it
not becoming more and more, an English characteristic? In England, as
well as in America, it appears to foreigners, and even to Englishmen
recently returned from a foreign country, as if everybody had but one
wish—to improve his condition, never to enjoy it, as if no Englishman
cared to cultivate either the pleasures or the virtues corresponding to
his station in society, but solely to get out of it as quickly as
possible, or if that cannot be done, and until it is done, to yseemy to
have got out of it. “The hypocrisy of luxury,” as M. de Tocqueville
calls the maintaining an appearance beyond one’s real expenditure, he
considers as a democratic peculiarity.[*] It is surely an English one.
The highest class of all, indeed, is, as might be expected,
comparatively exempt from these bad peculiarities. But the very
existence of such a class, whose immunities and political privileges are
attainable by wealth, tends to aggravate the struggle of the other
classes for the possession of that passport to all other importance;
Edition: current; Page: [194] and it perhaps required the example of
America to prove that the “sabbathless pursuit of wealth”[*] could be as
intensely prevalent, where there were no aristocratic distinctions to
tempt to it.

Again, the mobility and fluctuating nature of individual relations—the
absence of permanent ties, local or personal; how often has this been
commented on as one of the organic changes by which the ancient
structure of English society is becoming dissolved? Without reverting to
the days of clanship, or to those in which the gentry led a patriarchal
life among their tenantry and neighbours, the memory of man extends to a
time when the same tenants remained attached to the same landlords, the
same servants to the same zhousehold. Butz this, with other old customs,
after progressively retiring to the remote corners of our island, has
nearly taken flight altogether; and it may now be said that in all the
relations of life, except those to which law and religion have given
apermanencea, change has become the general rule, and constancy the
exception.

The remainder of the tendencies which M. de Tocqueville has delineated,
may mostly be brought under one general agency as their immediate cause;
the growing insignificance of individuals in comparison with the mass.
Now, it would be difficult to show any country in which this
insignificance is more marked and conspicuous than in England, or any
incompatibility between that tendency and aristocratic institutions. It
is not because the individuals composing the mass are all equal, but
because the mass itself has grown to so immense a size, that individuals
are powerless in the face of it; and because the mass, having, by
mechanical improvements, become capable of acting simultaneously, can
compel not merely any individual, but any number of individuals, to bend
before it. The House of Lords is the richest and most powerful
collection of persons in Europe, yet they not only could not prevent,
but were themselves compelled to pass, the Reform Bill. The daily
actions of every peer and peeress are falling more and more under the
yoke of bourgeois opinion; they feel every day a stronger necessity of
showing an immaculate front to the world. When they do venture to
disregard common opinion, it is in a body, and when supported by one
another; whereas formerly every nobleman acted on his own notions, and
dared be as eccentric as he pleased. No rank in society is now exempt
from the fear of being peculiar, the unwillingness to be, or to be
thought, in any respect original. Hardly anything now depends upon
individuals, but all upon classes, and among classes mainly upon the
middle class. That class is now the power in society, the arbiter of
fortune and success. Ten times more money is made Edition: current;
Page: [195] by supplying the wants, even the superfluous wants, of the
middle, nay of the lower classes, than those of the higher. It is the
middle class that now rewards even literature and art; the books by
which most money is made are the cheap books; the greatest part of the
profit of a picture is the profit of the engraving from it. Accordingly,
all the intellectual effects which M. de Tocqueville ascribes to
Democracy, are taking place under the bdemocracyb of the middle class.
There is a greatly augmented number of moderate successes, fewer great
literary and scientific reputations. Elementary and popular treatises
are immensely multiplied, superficial information far more widely
diffused; but there are fewer who devote themselves to thought for its
own sake, and pursue in retirement those profounder researches, the
cresultsc of which can only be appreciated by a few. Literary
productions are seldom highly finished—they are got up to be read by
many, and to be read but once. If the work sells for a day, the author’s
time and pains will be better laid out in writing a second, than in
improving the first. And this is not because books are no longer written
for the aristocracy: they never were so. The aristocracy (saving
individual exceptions) never were a reading class. It is because books
are now written for a numerous, and therefore an unlearned public; no
longer principally for scholars and men of science, who have knowledge
of their own, and are not imposed upon by half-knowledge—who have
studied the great works of genius, and can make comparisons.*

As for the decay of authority, and diminution of respect for traditional
opinions, this could not well be so far advanced among an ancient
people—all whose political notions rest on an historical basis, and
whose institutions themselves are built on prescription, and not on
ideas of expediency—as in America, where the whole edifice of government
was constructed within Edition: current; Page: [196] the memory of man
upon abstract principles. But surely this change also is taking place as
fast as could be expected under the circumstances. And even this effect,
though it has a more direct connexion with Democracy, has not an
exclusive one. Respect for old opinions must diminish wherever science
and knowledge are rapidly progressive. As the people in general become
aware of the recent date of the most important physical discoveries,
they are liable to form a rather contemptuous opinion of their
ancestors. The mere visible fruits of scientific progress in a wealthy
society, the mechanical improvements, the steam-engines, the railroads,
carry the feeling of admiration for modern and disrespect for ancient
times down even to the wholly uneducated classes. For that other mental
characteristic which M. de Tocqueville finds in America—a positive,
matter-of-fact spirit—a demand that all things shall be made clear to
each man’s understanding—an indifference to the subtler proofs which
address themselves to more cultivated and systematically exercised
intellects; for what may be called, in short, the dogmatism of common
sense—we need not look beyond our own country. There needs no Democracy
to account for this; there needs only the habit of energetic action,
without a proportional development of the taste for speculation.
Bonaparte was one of the most remarkable examples of it; and the
diffusion of half-instruction, without any sufficient provision made by
society for sustaining the higher cultivation, tends greatly to
encourage its excess.

Nearly all those moral and social influences, therefore, which are the
subject of M. de Tocqueville’s second part, are shown to be in full
operation in aristocratic England. What connexion they have with
equality is with the growth of the middle class, not with the
annihilation of the extremes. They are quite compatible with the
existence of peers and prolétaires; nay, with the most abundant
provision of both those varieties of human nature. If we were sure of
gretainingg for ever our aristocratic institutions, society would no
less have to struggle against all these tendencies; and perhaps even the
loss of those institutions would not have so much effect as is supposed
in accelerating theirh triumph.

The evil is not in the preponderance of a democratic class, but of any
class. The defects which M. de Tocqueville points out in the American,
and which we see in the modern English mind, are the ordinary ones of a
commercial class. The portion of society which is predominant in
America, and that which is attaining predominance here, the American
Many, and our middle class, agree in being commercial classes. The one
country is affording a complete, and the other a progressive
exemplification, that whenever any variety of human nature becomes
preponderant in a community, it imposes upon all the rest of society its
own type; forcing all, either to submit to it or to imitate it.

Edition: current; Page: [197]
It is not in China only that a homogeneous community is naturally a
stationary community. The unlikeness of one ipersoni to another is not
only a principle of improvement, but would seem almost to be the only
principle. It is profoundly remarked by M. Guizot, that the short
duration or stunted growth of the earlier civilizations arose from this,
that in each of them some one element of human improvement existed
exclusively, or so preponderatingly as to overpower all the others,
whereby the community, after accomplishing rapidly all which that one
element could do, either perished for want of what it could not do, or
came to a halt, and became immoveable.[*] It would be an error to
suppose that such could not possibly be our fate. In the generalization
which pronounces the “law of progress” to be an inherent attribute of
human nature, it is forgotten that, among the inhabitants of our earth,
the European family of nations is the only one which has ever jyetj
shown any capability of spontaneous improvement, beyond a certain low
level. Let us beware of supposing that we owe this peculiarity to any
ksuperiorityk of nature, and not rather to combinations of
circumstances, which have existed nowhere else, and may not exist for
ever among ourselves. The spirit of commerce and industry is one of the
greatest instruments not only of civilization in the narrowest, but of
improvement and culture in the widest sense: to it, or to its
consequences, we owe nearly all that advantageously distinguishes the
present period from the middle ages. So long as other coordinate
elements of improvement existed beside it, doing what it left undone,
and keeping its exclusive tendencies in equipoise by an opposite order
of sentiments, principles of action, and modes of thought—so long the
benefits which it conferred on humanity were unqualified. But example
and theory alike justify the expectation, that with its complete
preponderance would commence an era either of stationariness or of
decline.

If to avert this consummation it were necessary that the class which
wields the strongest power in society should be prevented from
exercising its strength, or that those who are powerful enough to
overthrow the government should not claim a paramount control over it,
the case of civilized nations would be almost hopeless. But human
affairs are not entirely governed by mechanical laws, nor men’s
characters wholly and irrevocably formed by their situation in life.
Economical and social changes, though among the greatest, are not the
only forces which shape the course of our species; ideas are not always
the mere signs and effects of social circumstances, Edition: current;
Page: [198] they are themselves a power in history. Let the idea take
hold of the more generous and cultivated minds, that the most serious
danger to the future prospects of mankind is in the unbalanced influence
of the commercial spirit—let the wiser and better-hearted politicians
and public teachers look upon it as their most pressing duty, to protect
and strengthen whatever, in the heart of man or in his outward life, can
form a salutary check to the exclusive tendencies of that spirit—and we
should not only have individual testimonies against it, in all the forms
of genius, from those who have the privilege of speaking not to their
own age merely, but to all time; there would also gradually shape itself
forth a national education, which, without overlooking any other of the
requisites of human well-being, would be adapted to this purpose in
particular.

What is requisite in politics for the same end, is not that public
opinion should not be, what it is and must be, the ruling power; but
that, in order to the formation of the best public opinion, there should
exist somewhere a great social support for opinions and sentiments
different from those of the mass. The shape which that support may best
assume is a question of time, place, and circumstance; but (in a
commercial country, and an age when, happily for mankind, the military
spirit is gone by) there can be no doubt about the elements which must
compose it: they are, an agricultural class, a leisured class, and a
learned class.

The natural tendencies of an agricultural class are in many respects the
reverse of those of a manufacturing and commercial. In the first place,
from their more scattered position, and less exercised activity of mind,
they have usually a greater willingness to look up to, and accept of,
guidance. In the next place, they are the class who have local
attachments; and it is astonishing how much of character depends upon
this one circumstance. If the agricultural spirit is not felt in America
as a counterpoise to the commercial, it is because American
agriculturists have no local attachments; they range from place to
place, and are to all intents and purposes a commercial class. But in an
old country, where the same family has long occupied the same land, the
case will naturally be different. From attachment to places, follows
attachment to persons who are associated with those places. Though no
longer the permanent tie which it once was, the connexion between
tenants and landlords is one not llightlyl broken off;—one which both
parties, when they enter into it, desire and hope mwillm be permanent.
Again, with attachment to the place comes generally attachment to the
occupation: a farmer seldom becomes anything but a farmer. The rage of
money-getting can scarcely, in agricultural occupations, reach any
dangerous height: except where bad laws have aggravated the natural
fluctuations of price, there is Edition: current; Page: [199] little
room for gambling; the rewards of industry and skill are nsuren but
moderate; an agriculturist can rarely make a large fortune. A
manufacturer or merchant, unless he can outstrip others, knows that
others will outstrip him, and ruin him, while, in the irksome drudgery
to which he subjects himself as a means, there is nothing agreeable to
dwell on except the ultimate end. But agriculture is in itself an
interesting occupation, which few wish to retire from, and which men of
property and education often pursue merely for their amusement. Men so
occupied are satisfied with less gain, and are less impatient to realize
it. Our town population, it has long been remarked, is becoming almost
as mobile ando uneasy as the American. It ought not to be so with our
agriculturists; they ought to be the counterbalancing element in our
national character; they should represent the type opposite to the
commercial,—that of moderate wishes, tranquil tastes, cultivation of the
excitements and enjoyments near at hand, and compatible with their
existing position.

To attain this object, how much alteration may be requisite in the
system of rack-renting and tenancy at will, we cannot undertake to show
in this place. It is sufficiently obvious also that the corn-laws[*]
must disappear: there must be no feud raging between the commercial
class and that by whose influence and example its excesses are to be
tempered: men are not prone to adopt the characteristics of their
enemies. Nor is this all. In order that the agricultural population
should count for anything in politics, or contribute its part to the
formation of the national character, it is absolutely necessary that it
should be educated. And let it be remembered that, in an agricultural
people, the diffusion of information and intelligence must necessarily
be artificial;—the work of government, or of the superior classes. In
populous towns, the mere collision of man with man, the keenness of
competition, the habits of society and discussion, the easy access to
reading—even the dulness of the ordinary occupations, which drives men
to other excitements—produce of themselves a certain development of
intelligence. The least favoured class of a town population are seldom
actually stupid, and have often in some directions a morbid keenness and
acuteness. It is otherwise with the peasantry. Whatever it is desired
that they should know, they must be taught, whatever intelligence is
expected to grow up among them, must first be implanted, and sedulously
nursed.

It is not needful to go into a similar analysis of the tendencies of the
other two classes—a leisured, and a learned class. The capabilities
which they possess for controlling the excess of the commercial spirit
by a contrary spirit, are at once apparent. We regard it as one of the
greatest advantages Edition: current; Page: [200] of this country over
America, that it possesses both these classes; and we believe that the
interests of the time to come are greatly dependent upon preserving
them; and upon their being rendered, as they much require to be, better
and better qualified for their important functions.

If we believed that the national character of England, instead of
reacting upon the American character and raising it, was gradually
assimilating itself to those points of it which the best and wisest
Americans see with most uneasiness, it would be no consolation to us to
think that we might possibly avoid pthe institutions of Americap; for we
should have all the effects of her institutions, except those which are
beneficial. The American Many are not essentially a different class from
our ten-pound householders; and if the middle class are left to the mere
habits and instincts of a commercial community, we shall have a “tyranny
of the majority,” not the less irksome because most of the tyrants may
not be manual labourers. For it is a chimerical hope to overbear or
outnumber the middle class; whatever modes of voting, whatever
redistribution of the constituencies, are really necessary for placing
the government in their hands, those, whether we like it or not, they
will assuredly obtain.

The ascendancy of the commercial class in modern society and politics is
inevitable, and, under due limitations, ought not to be regarded as an
evil. That class is the most powerful: but it needs not therefore be
all-powerful. Now, as ever, the great problem in government is to
prevent the strongest from becoming the only power; and repress the
natural tendency of the instincts and passions of the ruling body, to
sweep away all barriers which are capable of resisting, even for a
moment, their own tendencies. Any counterbalancing power can henceforth
exist only by the sufferance of the commercial class; but that it should
tolerate some such limitation, we deem as important as that it should
not itself be held in vassalage.

* * * * *

qAs a specimen of the contrivances for “organizing democracy,” which,
without sacrificing any of its beneficial tendencies, are adapted to
counter-balance and correct its characteristic infirmities, an extract
is subjoined from another paper by the author, published in 1846, being
a review of the Lettres Politiques[*] of M. Charles Duveyrier;[†] a book
which among many Edition: current; Page: [201] other valuable
suggestions, anticipated Sir Charles Trevelyan in the proposal to make
admission into the service of government in all cases the prize of
success in a public and competitive examination.[*]

Every peopler. [says M. Duveyrier.]r comprises, and probably will always
comprise, two societies, an administration and a public: the one, of
which the general interest is the supreme law, where positions are not
hereditary, but the principle is that of classing its members according
to their merit, and rewarding them according to their works; and where
the moderation of salaries is compensated by their fixity, and
especially by honour and consideration. The other, composed of landed
proprietors, of capitalists, of masters and workmen, among whom the
supreme law is that of inheritance, the principal rule of conduct is
personal interest, competition and struggle the favourite elements.

These two societies serve mutually as a counterpoise, they continually
act and react upon one another. The public tends to introduce into the
administration the stimulus naturally wanting to it, the principle of
emulation. The administration, conformably to its appointed purpose,
tends to introduce more and more into the mass of the public, elements
of order and forethought. In this twofold direction, the administration
and the public have rendered and do render daily to each other,
reciprocal services.[†]

The Chamber of Deputies (he proceeds to say) represents the public and
its tendencies. The Chamber of Peers represents, or from its
constitution is fitted to represent, those who are or have been public
functionaries: whose appointed duty and occupation it has been to look
at questions from the point of view not of any mere local or sectional,
but of the general interest: and who have the judgment and knowledge
resulting from labour and experience. To a body like this, it naturally
belongs to take the initiative in all legislation, not of a
constitutional or organic character. If, in the natural course of
things, well-considered views of policy are anywhere to be looked for,
it must be among such a body. To no other acceptance can such views,
when originating elsewhere, be so appropriately submitted—through no
other organ so fitly introduced into the laws.

We shall not enter into the considerations by which the author attempts
to impress upon the Peers this elevated view of their function in the
commonwealth. On a new body, starting fresh as a senate, those
considerations might have influence. But the senate of France is not a
new body. It set out on the discredited foundation of the old hereditary
chamber: and its change of character only takes place gradually, as the
members die off. To redeem a lost position is more difficult than to
create a new one. The new members, Edition: current; Page: [202] joining
a body of no weight, become accustomed to political insignificance; they
have mostly passed the age of enterprise, and the Peerage is considered
little else than an honourable retirement for the invalids of the public
service. M. Duveyrier’s suggestion has made some impression upon the
public, it has gained him the public ear, and launched his doctrines
into discussion; but we do not find that the conduct of the Peers has
been at all affected by it. Energy is precisely that quality which, if
men have it not of themselves, cannot be breathed into them by other
people’s advice and exhortations. There are involved, however, in this
speculation, some ideas of a more general character; not unworthy of the
attention of those who concern themselves about the social changes which
the future must produce.

There are, we believe, few real thinkers, of whatever party, who have
not reflected with some anxiety upon the views which have become current
of late, respecting the irresistible tendency of modern society towards
democracy. The sure, and now no longer slow, advance, by which the
classes hitherto in the ascendant are merging into the common mass, and
all other forces sares giving way before the power of mere numbers, is
well calculated to inspire uneasiness, even in those to whom democracy
per se presents nothing alarming. It is not the uncontrolled ascendancy
of popular power, but of any power, which is formidable. There is no one
power in society, or capable of being constituted in it, of which the
influences do not become mischievous as soon as it reigns
uncontrolled—as soon as it becomes exempted from any necessity of being
in the right, by being able to make its mere will prevail, without the
condition of a previous struggle. To render its ascendancy safe, it must
be fitted with correctives and counteractives, possessing the qualities
opposite to its characteristic defects. Now, the defects to which the
government of numbers, whether in the pure American or in the mixed
English form, is most liable, are precisely those of a public, as
compared with an administration. Want of appreciation of distant objects
and remote consequences; where an object is desired, want both of an
adequate sense of practical difficulties, and of the sagacity necessary
for eluding them; disregard of traditions, and of maxims sanctioned by
experience; an undervaluing of the importance of fixed rules, when
immediate purposes require a departure from them—these are among the
acknowledged dangers of popular government: and there is the still
greater, though less recognised, danger, of being ruled by a spirit of
suspicious and intolerant mediocrity. Taking these things into
consideration, and also the progressive decline of the existing checks
and counterpoises, and the little probability there is that the
influence of mere wealth, still less of birth, will be sufficient
hereafter to restrain the tendencies of the growing power by mere
passive resistance; we do not think Edition: current; Page: [203] that a
nation whose historical tantecedentst give it any choice, could select a
fitter basis upon which to ground the counterbalancing power in the
State, than the principle of the French Upper House. The defects of
urepresentative assembliesu are, in substance, those of unskilled
politicians. The mode of raising a power most competent to their
correction, would be an organization and combination of the skilled.
History affords the example of a government carried on for centuries
with the greatest consistency of purpose, and the highest skill and
talent, ever realized in public affairs; and it was constituted on this
very principle. The Roman Senate was a Senate for life, composed of all
who had filled high offices in the State, and were not disqualified by a
public note of disgrace. The faults of the Roman policy were in its
ends; which, however, were those of all the vstatesv of the ancient
world. Its choice of means was consummate. This government, and others
distantly approaching to it, have given to aristocracy all the credit
which it has obtained for constancy and wisdom. A Senate of some such
description, composed of persons no longer young, and whose reputation
is already gained, will necessarily lean to the Conservative side, but
not with the blind, merely instinctive spirit of conservatism, generated
by mere wealth or social importance unearned by previous labour. Such a
body would secure a due hearing and a reasonable regard for precedent
and established rule. It would disarm jealousy, by its freedom from any
class interest, and while it never could become the really predominant
power in the State, still, since its position would be the consequence
of recognised merit and actual services to the public, it would have as
much personal influence, and excite as little hostility, as is
compatible with resisting in any degree the tendencies of the really
strongest power.

There is another class of considerations connected with wrepresentative
governmentsw, to which we shall also briefly advert. In proportion as it
has been better understood what legislation is, and the unity of plan as
well as maturity of deliberation which are essential to it, thinking
persons have asked themselves the question—Whether a popular body of 658
or 459 members, not specially educated for the purpose, having served no
apprenticeship, and undergone no examination, and who transact business
in the forms and very much in the spirit of a debating society, can have
as its peculiarly appropriate office to make laws? Whether that is not a
work certain to be spoiled by putting such a superfluous number of hands
upon it? Whether it is not essentially a business for one, or a very
small number, of most carefully prepared Edition: current; Page: [204]
and selected individuals? And whether the proper office of a
Representative Body, (in addition to controlling the public expenditure,
and deciding who shall hold office,) be not that of discussing all
national interests, of giving expression to the wishes and feelings of
the country; and granting or withholding its consent to the laws which
others make, rather than themselves framing, or even altering them? The
law of this and most other nations is already such a chaos, that the
quality of what is yearly added, does not materially affect the general
mass; but in a country possessed of a real Code or Digest, and desirous
of retaining that advantage, who could think without dismay of its being
tampered with at the will of a body like the House of Commons, or the
Chamber of Deputies? Imperfect as is the French Code, the inconveniences
arising from this cause are already strongly felt; and they afford an
additional inducement for associating with the popular body a skilled
Senate, or Council of Legislation, which, whatever might be its special
constitution, must be grounded upon some form of the principle which we
have now considered.q

Edition: current; Page: [205]


REFORM OF THE CIVIL SERVICE
 1854

Edition: current; Page: [206]


EDITOR’S NOTE

“Papers relating to the Re-organisation of the Civil Service,”
Parliamentary Papers, 1854-55, XX, 92-8. Originally headed: “Mr. John
Stuart Mill, / May 22, 1854.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A
paper on the proposed Reform of the Civil Service, included among those
printed in a Collection of papers thereupon, laid before Parliament in
the Session of 1854/5.” (MacMinn, 88.) In the Somerville College Library
there is a copy of the pamphlet reprint of the paper (Paper on the
Re-organisation of the Civil Service. By Mr. John Stuart Mill, London:
Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1855; paged 1-9).

For comment on the circumstances surrounding Mill’s writing of the
paper, see the Textual Introduction, lxxviii above.

Edition: current; Page: [207]


Reform of the Civil Service

the proposal to select candidates for the Civil Service of Government by
a competitive examination[*] appears to me to be one of those great
public improvements the adoption of which would form an era in history.
The effects which it is calculated to produce in raising the character
both of the public administration and of the people can scarcely be
over-estimated.

It has equal claims to support from the disinterested and impartial
among conservatives and among reformers. For its adoption would be the
best vindication which could be made of existing political institutions,
by showing that the classes who under the present constitution have the
greatest influence in the government, do not desire any greater share of
the profits derivable from it than their merits entitle them to, but are
willing to take the chances of competition with ability in all ranks:
while the plan offers to liberals, so far as the plan extends, the
realization of the principal object which any honest reformer desires to
effect by political changes, namely, that the administration of public
affairs should be in the most competent hands, which, as regards the
permanent part of the administrative body, would be ensured by the
proposed plan, so far as it is possible for any human contrivance to
secure it.

When we add to this consideration the extraordinary stimulus which would
be given to mental cultivation in its most important branches, not
solely by the hope of prizes to be obtained by means of it, but by the
effect of the national recognition of it as the exclusive title to
participation in the conduct of so large and conspicuous a portion of
the national affairs, and when we further think of the great and
salutary moral revolution, descending to the minds of almost the lowest
classes, which would follow the knowledge that Government (to people in
general the most trusted exponent of the ways of the world) would
henceforth bestow its gifts according to merit, and not to favour; it is
difficult to express in any language which would not appear exaggerated,
the benefits which, as it appears to me, would ultimately be the
consequences of the successful execution of the scheme.

Edition: current; Page: [208]
The objections usually heard, or seen in print, against this great
improvement, are either grounded on imperfect apprehension, or, when
examined, are found to bear involuntary testimony to the existing need
of such a change.

For example, it has been called, in Parliament and elsewhere, a scheme
for taking patronage from the Crown and its officers, and giving it to a
body of examiners.[*] This objection ignores the whole essence of the
plan. As at present conducted, the bestowal of appointments is
patronage. But the conferring of certificates of eligibility by the
Board of Examiners would not be patronage, but a judicial act. The
examiners for honours at the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, or
London, have not the patronage of honours; nor has the Lord Chancellor,
when he decrees an estate to one person instead of another, the
patronage of the estate. If it be meant that the examiners would not be
capable and impartial, the objection is intelligible. But capable and
impartial examiners are found for university purposes, and for the
purposes of the educational department of the Privy Council; and they
will be found for the present purpose, supposing that there is a sincere
desire to find them. The idea that an examination test is likely to be
merely nominal, is grounded on the experience of a different kind of
examination from that proposed. It is derived from examinations without
competition. When the only object is to ascertain whether the candidate
possesses a certain minimum of acquirement, it is usually thought that
this minimum should be placed low enough to give a chance to all; and
however low it may be placed, good nature interferes to prevent it from
being rigidly enforced against any but absolute dunces, whilst the other
candidates are willing to encourage and applaud this relaxation of duty,
and even to connive at frauds on the part of the incompetent. The
feelings of all concerned are very different, when the question to be
resolved is, who among the candidates that present themselves are the
most qualified. Indulgence to one, is then injustice to others, and
wears a very different aspect to the conscience from that, falsely
thought more venial, laxity, by which the public alone is damaged. In
this case, too, the interests and feelings of the other competitors are
enlisted in favour of preventing and detecting fraud. With a honest
choice of examiners, a competitive examination is as unlikely to fail,
as a mere test is unlikely to succeed.

Another objection is, that if appointments are given to talent, the
Public Offices will be filled with low people, without the breeding or
the feelings of gentlemen. If, as this objection supposes, the sons of
gentlemen cannot be expected to have as much ability and instruction as
the sons of low people, it would make a strong case for social changes
of a more extensive character. If the sons of gentlemen would not, even
under the stimulus of competition, maintain themselves on an equality of
intellect and attainments with youths Edition: current; Page: [209] of a
lower rank, how much more below the mark must they be with their present
monopoly; and to how much greater an extent than the friends of the
measure allege, must the efficiency of the Public Service be at present
sacrificed to their incompetency. And more: if, with advantages and
opportunities so vastly superior, the youth of the higher classes have
not honour enough, or energy enough, or public spirit enough, to make
themselves as well qualified as others for the station which they desire
to maintain, they are not fit for that station, and cannot too soon step
out of it and give place to better people. I have not this unfavourable
opinion of them: I believe that they will fairly earn their full share
of every kind of distinction, when they are no longer able to obtain it
unearned.

Another objection is, that no examination can test more than a part of
the qualities required in a Public Servant; that it is a test of book
knowledge, but neither of moral qualities, nor of those which form the
foundation of ability in the practical conduct of life. And it is added,
that the proposed examination would have excluded Wellington, Nelson,
and many more of those who have most distinguished themselves in public
functions.

With regard to practical talents, it may be very true that Nelson or
Wellington could not have passed a literary examination. But if such an
examination had been required in their day for entering the army or
navy, can any one suppose that young men of their energy and capacity
would not have qualified themselves for it; or that even they would have
derived no benefit from it? The assumption, besides, is gratuitous, that
the examination would be solely literary. It is proposed that it should
be also scientific; and this should include the practical applications
of science: and there would be great propriety in allowing persons to
offer themselves for a competitive examination in any kind of knowledge
which can be useful in any department whatever of the Public Service,
such number of marks being assigned to each of these special
acquirements, compared with the more general ones, as in the judgment of
the Examining Board might correspond to their value. Above all, however,
it ought to be remembered, that the worth of the examination is as a
test of powers and habits of mind, still more than of acquirements; for
talent and application will be sure to acquire the positive knowledge
found necessary for their profession, but acquirements may be little
more than a dead weight if there is not ability to turn them to use.

With regard to moral qualities, undoubtedly no examination can directly
test them; but indirectly it must do so in no inconsiderable degree; for
it is idleness, and not application, which is “the mother of vice;” and
a well cultivated intellect will seldom be found unaccompanied by
prudence, temperance, and justice, and generally by the virtues which
are of importance in our intercourse with others. Whatever means of
judging of the moral character of the applicants may be adopted, I will
venture to express a hope that Edition: current; Page: [210] they may be
of a different kind from those suggested by Mr. Jowett;[*] who would
demand from every candidate for examination a certificate of baptism
[Jowett, p. 24; pp. 654-5 below], thus excluding even the Christian
sects which do not practise that rite, and would require, among other
references, one to a clergyman or a dissenting minister [Jowett, p. 25;
p. 655 below]; which, as they would of course give their recommendations
only to those whose religious character they approved of, would amount
to the severest penalty for non-attendance on some church or minister of
religion, and would be in fact a religious test, excluding many highly
qualified candidates. If by requiring a statement of the “school or
college” where the young man has been educated [Jowett, p. 24; p. 655
below], it be meant that he must have been educated at a school or
college, this is another unjust and injudicious limitation (by which,
among others, the writer of this letter would have been excluded, having
never been at either school or college). Above all, I would point out
the terrible principle brought in by the truly inquisitor-like
proceeding recommended by Mr. Jowett, of “confidential” inquiries, and
rejection “absolute and without reasons.” [Jowett, p. 25; p. 655 below.]
A youth who has passed all the previous years of his life in fitting
himself for examination, is, according to Mr. Jowett’s notions of
justice, to find himself, in consequence of a secret accusation,
rejected, he knows not why, and without the possibility of clearing his
character from the unknown imputation! If any young man is rejected on
moral grounds, it ought, I conceive, to be on a definite charge, which
he has had a full opportunity of answering.[†] I would also suggest
reconsideration of the (as it appears to me) very questionable principle
of excluding youths otherwise qualified, by requiring a medical
examination.[‡] It would be easy to find other means of preventing a
public appointment from being made a means of obtaining a provision in
the form of a pension without having rendered service sufficient to earn
it.

In the preceding observations I have assumed, as requiring no proof,
that the object proposed is in itself desirable; that it would be a
public benefit if the Public Service, or all that part of it the duties
of which are of an intellectual character, were composed of the most
intelligent and instructed persons who could be attracted to it. If
there be any who maintain a contrary doctrine, and say that the world is
not made only for persons of ability, and that mediocrity also ought to
have a share in it; I answer, certainly, but not in managing the affairs
of the State. Mediocrity should betake itself to those things in which
few besides itself will be imperilled by its deficiences,—to Edition:
current; Page: [211] mechanical labour, or the mechanical
superintendence of labour, occupations as necessary as any others, and
which no person of sense considers disparaging. There will be,
assuredly, ample space for the mediocrities, in employments which
require only mediocrity, when all who are beyond mediocrity have found
the employment in which their talents can be of most use.

I do not overlook the fact that the great majority, numerically
speaking, of public employments, can be adequately filled by a very
moderate amount of ability and knowledge; and I assume, that a proper
distinction is made between these and the others. It would be absurd to
subject a tide-waiter, a letter-carrier, or a simple copyist, to the
same test as the confidential adviser of a Secretary of State; nor would
the former situation be an object to any one capable of competing for
the latter. The competition for the inferior posts must be practically
limited to acquirements which are attainable by the persons who seek
such employments; but it is by no means a consequence that it should be
confined to such things as have a direct connexion with their duties.
The classes which supply these branches of the Public Service are among
those on whom it is most important to inculcate the lesson, that mental
cultivation is desirable on its own account, and not solely as a means
of livelihood or worldly advancement; that whatever tends to enlarge or
elevate their minds, adds to their worth as human beings, and that the
Government considers the most valuable human being as the worthiest to
be a Public Servant, and is guided by that consideration in its choice,
even when it does not require his particular attainments or
accomplishments for its own use. A man may not be a much better postman
for being able to draw, or being acquainted with natural history; but he
who in that rank possesses these acquirements, has given evidence of
qualities which it is important for the general cultivation of the mass
that the State should take every fair opportunity of stamping with its
approbation.

Edition: current; Page: [212] Edition: current; Page: [213]


ON LIBERTY
 1859

Edition: current; Page: [214]


EDITOR’S NOTE

4th ed. London: Longmans, Green, Reader and Dyer, 1869. Reprinted from
3rd ed. London: Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts & Green, 1864; 2nd ed.
London: Parker, 1859; and 1st ed. London: Parker, 1859. Identified in
JSM’s bibliography as “ ‘On Liberty’ a small volume post 8vo, published
in February, 1859” (MacMinn, 92). For an account of the composition of
On Liberty and related matters, see the Textual Introduction,
lxxviii-lxxxiii above.

The text below, that of the 4th edition (the last in JSM’s lifetime),
has been collated with those of the 3rd, 2nd, 1st, and People’s
Editions. In the footnoted variants, the 3rd edition is indicated by
“64”, the 2nd by “592”, and the 1st by “591”. Substantive variants
between the People’s Edition and the 4th edition are given in Appendix
D.

Edition: current; Page: [215]
“The grand, leading principle, towards which every argument unfolded in
these pages directly converges, is the absolute and essential importance
of human development in its richest diversity.”

Wilhelm von Humboldt, Sphere and Duties of Government.

[Trans. Joseph Coulthard (London: Chapman, 1854), p. 65.]

Edition: current; Page: [216]
To the beloved and deplored memory of her who was the inspirer, and in
part the author, of all that is best in my writings—the friend and wife
whose exalted sense of truth and right was my strongest incitement, and
whose approbation was my chief reward—I dedicate this volume. Like all
that I have written for many years, it belongs as much to her as to me;
but the work as it stands has had, in a very insufficient degree, the
inestimable advantage of her revision; some of the most important
portions having been reserved for a more careful re-examination, which
they are now never destined to receive. Were I but capable of
interpreting to the world one half the great thoughts and noble feelings
which are buried in her grave, I should be the medium of a greater
benefit to it, than is ever likely to arise from anything that I can
write, unprompted and unassisted by her all but unrivalled wisdom.

Edition: current; Page: [217]


CHAPTER I: Introductory

the subject of this Essay is not the so-called Liberty of the Will, so
unfortunately opposed to the misnamed doctrine of Philosophical
Necessity; but Civil, or Social Liberty: the nature and limits of the
power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the
individual. A question seldom stated, and hardly ever discussed, in
general terms, but which profoundly influences the practical
controversies of the age by its latent presence, and is likely soon to
make itself recognised as the vital question of the future. It is so far
from being new, that, in a certain sense, it has divided mankind, almost
from the remotest ages; but in the stage of progress into which the more
civilized portions of the species have now entered, it presents itself
under new conditions, and requires a different and more fundamental
treatment.

The struggle between Liberty and Authority is the most conspicuous
feature in the portions of history with which we are earliest familiar,
particularly in that of Greece, Rome, and England. But in old times this
contest was between subjects, or some classes of subjects, and the
aGovernmenta. By liberty, was meant protection against the tyranny of
the political rulers. The rulers were conceived (except in some of the
popular governments of Greece) as in a necessarily antagonistic position
to the people whom they ruled. They consisted of a governing One, or a
governing tribe or caste, who derived their authority from inheritance
or conquest, who, at all events, did not hold it at the pleasure of the
governed, and whose supremacy men did not venture, perhaps did not
desire, to contest, whatever precautions might be taken against its
oppressive exercise. Their power was regarded as necessary, but also as
highly dangerous; as a weapon which they would attempt to use against
their subjects, no less than against external enemies. To prevent the
weaker members of the community from being preyed upon by innumerable
vultures, it was needful that there should be an animal of prey stronger
than the rest, commissioned to keep them down. But as the king of the
vultures would be no less bent upon preying on the flock than any of the
minor harpies, it was indispensable to be in a perpetual attitude of
defence against his beak and claws. The aim, therefore, of patriots was
to set limits Edition: current; Page: [218] to the power which the ruler
should be suffered to exercise over the community; and this limitation
was what they meant by liberty. It was attempted in two ways. First, by
obtaining a recognition of certain immunities, called political
liberties or rights, which it was to be regarded as a breach of duty in
the ruler to infringe, and which, if he did infringe, specific
resistance, or general rebellion, was held to be justifiable. A second,
and generally a later expedient, was the establishment of constitutional
checks, by which the consent of the community, or of a body of some
sort, supposed to represent its interests, was made a necessary
condition to some of the more important acts of the governing power. To
the first of these modes of limitation, the ruling power, in most
European countries, was compelled, more or less, to submit. It was not
so with the second; and, to attain this, or when already in some degree
possessed, to attain it more completely, became everywhere the principal
object of the lovers of liberty. And so long as mankind were content to
combat one enemy by another, and to be ruled by a master, on condition
of being guaranteed more or less efficaciously against his tyranny, they
did not carry their aspirations beyond this point.

A time, however, came, in the progress of human affairs, when men ceased
to think it a necessity of nature that their governors should be an
independent power, opposed in interest to themselves. It appeared to
them much better that the various magistrates of the State should be
their tenants or delegates, revocable at their pleasure. In that way
alone, it seemed, could they have complete security that the powers of
government would never be abused to their disadvantage. By degrees this
new demand for elective and temporary rulers became the prominent object
of the exertions of the popular party, wherever any such party existed;
and superseded, to a considerable extent, the previous efforts to limit
the power of rulers. As the struggle proceeded for making the ruling
power emanate from the periodical choice of the ruled, some persons
began to think that too much importance had been attached to the
limitation of the power itself. That (it might seem) was a resource
against rulers whose interests were habitually opposed to those of the
people. What was now wanted was, that the rulers should be identified
with the people; that their interest and will should be the interest and
will of the nation. The nation did not need to be protected against its
own will. There was no fear of its tyrannizing over itself. Let the
rulers be effectually responsible to it, promptly removable by it, and
it could afford to trust them with power of which it could itself
dictate the use to be made. Their power was but the nation’s own power,
concentrated, and in a form convenient for exercise. This mode of
thought, or rather perhaps of feeling, was common among the last
generation of European liberalism, in the Continental section of which
it still apparently predominates. Those who admit any limit to what a
government may do, except in the case of such governments Edition:
current; Page: [219] as they think ought not to exist, stand out as
brilliant exceptions among the political thinkers of the Continent. A
similar tone of sentiment might by this time have been prevalent in our
own country, if the circumstances which for a time encouraged it, had
continued unaltered.

But, in political and philosophical theories, as well as in persons,
success discloses faults and infirmities which failure might have
concealed from observation. The notion, that the people have no need to
limit their power over themselves, might seem axiomatic, when popular
government was a thing only dreamed about, or read of as having existed
at some distant period of the past. Neither was that notion necessarily
disturbed by such temporary aberrations as those of the French
Revolution, the worst of which were the work of an usurping few, and
which, in any case, belonged, not to the permanent working of popular
institutions, but to a sudden and convulsive outbreak against
monarchical and aristocratic despotism. In time, however, a democratic
republic came to occupy a large portion of the earth’s surface, and made
itself felt as one of the most powerful members of the community of
nations; and elective and responsible government became subject to the
observations and criticisms which wait upon a great existing fact. It
was now perceived that such phrases as “self-government,” and “the power
of the people over themselves,” do not express the true state of the
case. The “people” who exercise the power are not always the same people
with those over whom it is exercised; and the “self-government” spoken
of is not the government of each by himself, but of each by all the
rest. The will of the people, moreover, practically means the will of
the most numerous or the most active part of the people; the majority,
or those who succeed in making themselves accepted as the majority; the
people, consequently, may desire to oppress a part of their number; and
precautions are as much needed against this as against any other abuse
of power. The limitation, therefore, of the power of government over
individuals loses none of its importance when the holders of power are
regularly accountable to the community, that is, to the strongest party
therein. This view of things, recommending itself equally to the
intelligence of thinkers and to the inclination of those important
classes in European society to whose real or supposed interests
democracy is adverse, has had no difficulty in establishing itself; and
in political speculations “the tyranny of the majority”[*] is now
generally included among the evils against which society requires to be
on its guard.

Like other tyrannies, the tyranny of the majority was at first, and is
still vulgarly, held in dread, chiefly as operating through the acts of
the public authorities. But reflecting persons perceived that when
society is itself the tyrant—society collectively, over the separate
individuals who compose it—its means of tyrannizing are not restricted
to the acts which it may do by the Edition: current; Page: [220] hands
of its political functionaries. Society can and does execute its own
mandates: and if it issues wrong mandates instead of right, or any
mandates at all in things with which it ought not to meddle, it
practises a social tyranny more formidable than many kinds of political
oppression, since, though not usually upheld by such extreme penalties,
it leaves fewer means of escape, penetrating much more deeply into the
details of life, and enslaving the soul itself. Protection, therefore,
against the tyranny of the magistrate is not enough: there needs
protection also against the tyranny of the prevailing opinion and
feeling; against the tendency of society to impose, by other means than
civil penalties, its own ideas and practices as rules of conduct on
those who dissent from them; to fetter the development, and, if
possible, prevent the formation, of any individuality not in harmony
with its ways, and compel all characters to fashion themselves upon the
model of its own. There is a limit to the legitimate interference of
collective opinion with individual independence: and to find that limit,
and maintain it against encroachment, is as indispensable to a good
condition of human affairs, as protection against political despotism.

But though this proposition is not likely to be contested in general
terms, the practical question, where to place the limit—how to make the
fitting adjustment between individual independence and social control—is
a subject on which nearly everything remains to be done. All that makes
existence valuable to any one, depends on the enforcement of restraints
upon the actions of other people. Some rules of conduct, therefore, must
be imposed, by law in the first place, and by opinion on many things
which are not fit subjects for the operation of law. What these rules
should be, is the principal question in human affairs; but if we except
a few of the most obvious cases, it is one of those which least progress
has been made in resolving. No two ages, and scarcely any two countries,
have decided it alike; and the decision of one age or country is a
wonder to another. Yet the people of any given age and country no more
suspect any difficulty in it, than if it were a subject on which mankind
had always been agreed. The rules which obtain among themselves appear
to them self-evident and self-justifying. This all but universal
illusion is one of the examples of the magical influence of custom,
which is not only, as the proverb says, a second nature, but is
continually mistaken for the first. The effect of custom, in preventing
any misgiving respecting the rules of conduct which mankind impose on
one another, is all the more complete because the subject is one on
which it is not generally considered necessary that reasons should be
given, either by one person to others, or by each to himself. People are
accustomed to believe, and have been encouraged in the belief by some
who aspire to the character of philosophers, that their feelings, on
subjects of this nature, are better than reasons, and render reasons
unnecessary. The practical principle which Edition: current; Page: [221]
guides them to their opinions on the regulation of human conduct, is the
feeling in each person’s mind that everybody should be required to act
as he, and those with whom he sympathizes, would like them to act. No
one, indeed, acknowledges to himself that his standard of judgment is
his own liking; but an opinion on a point of conduct, not supported by
reasons, can only count as one person’s preference; and if the reasons,
when given, are a mere appeal to a similar preference felt by other
people, it is still only many people’s liking instead of one. To an
ordinary man, however, his own preference, thus supported, is not only a
perfectly satisfactory reason, but the only one he generally has for any
of his notions of morality, taste, or propriety, which are not expressly
written in his religious creed; and his chief guide in the
interpretation even of that. Men’s opinions, accordingly, on what is
laudable or blameable, are affected by all the multifarious causes which
influence their wishes in regard to the conduct of others, and which are
as numerous as those which determine their wishes on any other subject.
Sometimes their reason—at other times their prejudices or superstitions:
often their social affections, not seldom their antisocial ones, their
envy or jealousy, their arrogance or contemptuousness: but most
commonly, their desires or fears for themselves—their legitimate or
illegitimate self-interest. Wherever there is an ascendant class, a
large portion of the morality of the country emanates from its class
interests, and its feelings of class superiority. The morality between
Spartans and Helots, between planters and negroes, between princes and
subjects, between nobles and roturiers, between men and women, has been
for the most part the creation of these class interests and feelings:
and the sentiments thus generated, react in turn upon the moral feelings
of the members of the ascendant class, in their relations among
themselves. Where, on the other hand, a class, formerly ascendant, has
lost its ascendancy, or where its ascendancy is unpopular, the
prevailing moral sentiments frequently bear the impress of an impatient
dislike of superiority. Another grand determining principle of the rules
of conduct, both in act and forbearance, which have been enforced by law
or opinion, has been the servility of mankind towards the supposed
preferences or aversions of their temporal masters, or of their gods.
This servility, though essentially selfish, is not hypocrisy; it gives
rise to perfectly genuine sentiments of abhorrence; it made men burn
magicians and heretics. Among so many baser influences, the general and
obvious interests of society have of course had a share, and a large
one, in the direction of the moral sentiments: less, however, as a
matter of reason, and on their own account, than as a consequence of the
sympathies and antipathies which grew out of them: and sympathies and
antipathies which had little or nothing to do with the interests of
society, have made themselves felt in the establishment of moralities
with quite as great force.

Edition: current; Page: [222]
The likings and dislikings of society, or of some powerful portion of
it, are thus the main thing which has practically determined the rules
laid down for general observance, under the penalties of law or opinion.
And in general, those who have been in advance of society in thought and
feeling, have left this condition of things unassailed in principle,
however they may have come into conflict with it in some of its details.
They have occupied themselves rather in inquiring what things society
ought to like or dislike, than in questioning whether its likings or
dislikings should be a law to individuals. They preferred endeavouring
to alter the feelings of mankind on the particular points on which they
were themselves heretical, rather than make common cause in defence of
freedom, with heretics generally. The only case in which the higher
ground has been taken on principle and maintained with consistency, by
any but an individual here and there, is that of religious belief: a
case instructive in many ways, and not least so as forming a most
striking instance of the fallibility of what is called the moral sense:
for the odium theologicum, in a sincere bigot, is one of the most
unequivocal cases of moral feeling. Those who first broke the yoke of
what called itself the Universal Church, were in general as little
willing to permit difference of religious opinion as that church itself.
But when the heat of the conflict was over, without giving a complete
victory to any party, and each church or sect was reduced to limit its
hopes to retaining possession of the ground it already occupied;
minorities, seeing that they had no chance of becoming majorities, were
under the necessity of pleading to those whom they could not convert,
for permission to differ. It is accordingly on this battle field, almost
solely, that the rights of the individual against society have been
asserted on broad grounds of principle, and the claim of society to
exercise authority over dissentients, openly controverted. The great
writers to whom the world owes what religious liberty it possesses, have
mostly asserted freedom of conscience as an indefeasible right, and
denied absolutely that a human being is accountable to others for his
religious belief. Yet so natural to mankind is intolerance in whatever
they really care about, that religious freedom has hardly anywhere been
practically realized, except where religious indifference, which
dislikes to have its peace disturbed by theological quarrels, has added
its weight to the scale. In the minds of almost all religious persons,
even in the most tolerant countries, the duty of toleration is admitted
with tacit reserves. One person will bear with dissent in matters of
church government, but not of dogma; another can tolerate everybody,
short of a Papist or an Unitarian; another, every one who believes in
revealed religion; a few extend their charity a little further, but stop
at the belief in a God and in a future state. Wherever the sentiment of
the majority is still genuine and intense, it is found to have abated
little of its claim to be obeyed.

In England, from the peculiar circumstances of our political history,
Edition: current; Page: [223] though the yoke of opinion is perhaps
heavier, that of law is lighter, than in most other countries of Europe;
and there is considerable jealousy of direct interference, by the
legislative or the executive power, with private conduct; not so much
from any just regard for the independence of the individual, as from the
still subsisting habit of looking on the government as representing an
opposite interest to the public. The majority have not yet learnt to
feel the power of the government their power, or its opinions their
opinions. When they do so, individual liberty will probably be as much
exposed to invasion from the government, as it already is from public
opinion. But, as yet, there is a considerable amount of feeling ready to
be called forth against any attempt of the law to control individuals in
things in which they have not hitherto been accustomed to be controlled
by it; and this with very little discrimination as to whether the matter
is, or is not, within the legitimate sphere of legal control; insomuch
that the feeling, highly salutary on the whole, is perhaps quite as
often misplaced as well grounded in the particular instances of its
application. There is, in fact, no recognised principle by which the
propriety or impropriety of government interference is customarily
tested. People decide according to their personal preferences. Some,
whenever they see any good to be done, or evil to be remedied, would
willingly instigate the government to undertake the business; while
others prefer to bear almost any amount of social evil, rather than add
one to the departments of human interests amenable to governmental
control. And men range themselves on one or the other side in any
particular case, according to this general direction of their
sentiments; or according to the degree of interest which they feel in
the particular thing which it is proposed that the government should do,
or according to the belief they entertain that the government would, or
would not, do it in the manner they prefer; but very rarely on account
of any opinion to which they consistently adhere, as to what things are
fit to be done by a government. And it seems to me that in consequence
of this absence of rule or principle, one side is at present as often
wrong as the other; the interference of government is, with about equal
frequency, improperly invoked and improperly condemned.

The object of this Essay is to assert one very simple principle, as
entitled to govern absolutely the dealings of society with the
individual in the way of compulsion and control, whether the means used
be physical force in the form of legal penalties, or the moral coercion
of public opinion. That principle is, that the sole end for which
mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with
the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection. That
the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any
member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to
others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient
warrant. He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear Edition:
current; Page: [224] because it will be better for him to do so, because
it will make him happier, because, in the opinions of others, to do so
would be wise, or even right. These are good reasons for remonstrating
with him, or reasoning with him, or persuading him, or entreating him,
but not for compelling him, or visiting him with any evil in case he do
otherwise. To justify that, the conduct from which it is desired to
deter him, must be calculated to produce evil to some one else. The only
part of the conduct of any one, for which he is amenable to society, is
that which concerns others. In the part which merely concerns himself,
his independence is, of right, absolute. Over himself, over his own body
and mind, the individual is sovereign.

It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to say that this doctrine is meant to
apply only to human beings in the maturity of their faculties. We are
not speaking of children, or of young persons below the age which the
law may fix as that of manhood or womanhood. Those who are still in a
state to require being taken care of by others, must be protected
against their own actions as well as against external injury. For the
same reason, we may leave out of consideration those backward states of
society in which the race itself may be considered as in its nonage. The
early difficulties in the way of spontaneous progress are so great, that
there is seldom any choice of means for overcoming them; and a ruler
full of the spirit of improvement is warranted in the use of any
expedients that will attain an end, perhaps otherwise unattainable.
Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with barbarians,
provided the end be their improvement, and the means justified by
actually effecting that end. Liberty, as a principle, has no application
to any state of things anterior to the time when mankind have become
capable of being improved by free and equal discussion. Until then,
there is nothing for them but implicit obedience to an Akbar or a
Charlemagne, if they are so fortunate as to find one. But as soon as
mankind have attained the capacity of being guided to their own
improvement by conviction or persuasion (a period long since reached in
all nations with whom we need here concern ourselves), compulsion,
either in the direct form or in that of pains and penalties for
non-compliance, is no longer admissible as a means to their own good,
and justifiable only for the security of others.

It is proper to state that I forego any advantage which could be derived
to my argument from the idea of abstract right, as a thing independent
of utility. I regard utility as the ultimate appeal on all ethical
questions: but it must be utility in the largest sense, grounded on the
permanent interests of man as a progressive being. Those interests, I
contend, authorize the subjection of individual spontaneity to external
control, only in respect to those actions of each, which concern the
interest of other people. If any one does an act hurtful to others,
there is a primâ facie case for punishing him, by law, or, where legal
penalties are not safely applicable, by general disapprobation. There
are also many positive acts for the benefit of others, which he may
Edition: current; Page: [225] rightfully be compelled to perform; such
as, to give evidence in a court of justice; to bear his fair share in
the common defence, or in any other joint work necessary to the interest
of the society of which he enjoys the protection; and to perform certain
acts of individual beneficence, such as saving a fellow-creature’s life,
or interposing to protect the defenceless against illusage, things which
whenever it is obviously a man’s duty to do, he may rightfully be made
responsible to society for not doing. A person may cause evil to others
not only by his actions but by his inaction, and in either case he is
justly accountable to them for the injury. The latter case, it is true,
requires a much more cautious exercise of compulsion than the former. To
make any one answerable for doing evil to others, is the rule; to make
him answerable for not preventing evil, is, comparatively speaking, the
exception. Yet there are many cases clear enough and grave enough to
justify that exception. In all things which regard the external
relations of the individual, he is de jure amenable to those whose
interests are concerned, and if need be, to society as their protector.
There are often good reasons for not holding him to the responsibility;
but these reasons must arise from the special expediencies of the case:
either because it is a kind of case in which he is on the whole likely
to act better, when left to his own discretion, than when controlled in
any way in which society have it in their power to control him; or
because the attempt to exercise control would produce other evils,
greater than those which it would prevent. When such reasons as these
preclude the enforcement of responsibility, the conscience of the agent
himself should step into the vacant judgment seat, and protect those
interests of others which have no external protection: judging himself
all the more rigidly, because the case does not admit of his being made
accountable to the judgment of his fellow-creatures.

But there is a sphere of action in which society, as distinguished from
the individual, has, if any, only an indirect interest; comprehending
all that portion of a person’s life and conduct which affects only
himself, or if it also affects others, only with their free, voluntary,
and undeceived consent and participation. When I say only himself, I
mean directly, and in the first instance: for whatever affects himself,
may affect others bthroughb himself; and the objection which may be
grounded on this contingency, will receive consideration in the sequel.
This, then, is the appropriate region of human liberty. It comprises,
first, the inward domain of consciousness; demanding liberty of
conscience, in the most comprehensive sense; liberty of thought and
feeling; absolute freedom of opinion and sentiment on all subjects,
practical or speculative, scientific, moral, or theological. The liberty
of expressing and publishing opinions may seem to fall under a different
principle, since it belongs to that part of the conduct of an individual
which Edition: current; Page: [226] concerns other people; but, being
almost of as much importance as the liberty of thought itself, and
resting in great part on the same reasons, is practically inseparable
from it. Secondly, the principle requires liberty of tastes and
pursuits; of framing the plan of our life to suit our own character; of
doing as we like, subject to such consequences as may follow: without
impediment from our fellow-creatures, so long as what we do does not
harm them, even though they should think our conduct foolish, perverse,
or wrong. Thirdly, from this liberty of each individual, follows the
liberty, within the same limits, of combination among individuals;
freedom to unite, for any purpose not involving harm to others: the
persons combining being supposed to be of full age, and not forced or
deceived.

No society in which these liberties are not, on the whole, respected, is
free, whatever may be its form of government; and none is completely
free in which they do not exist absolute and unqualified. The only
freedom which deserves the name, is that of pursuing our own good in our
own way, so long as we do not attempt to deprive others of theirs, or
impede their efforts to obtain it. Each is the proper guardian of his
own health, whether bodily, or mental and spiritual. Mankind are greater
gainers by suffering each other to live as seems good to themselves,
than by compelling each to live as seems good to the rest.

Though this doctrine is anything but new, and, to some persons, may have
the air of a truism, there is no doctrine which stands more directly
opposed to the general tendency of existing opinion and practice.
Society has expended fully as much effort in the attempt (according to
its lights) to compel people to conform to its notions of personal, as
of social excellence. The ancient commonwealths thought themselves
entitled to practise, and the ancient philosophers countenanced, the
regulation of every part of private conduct by public authority, on the
ground that the State had a deep interest in the whole bodily and mental
discipline of every one of its citizens; a mode of thinking which may
have been admissible in small republics surrounded by powerful enemies,
in constant peril of being subverted by foreign attack or internal
commotion, and to which even a short interval of relaxed energy and
self-command might so easily be fatal, that they could not afford to
wait for the salutary permanent effects of freedom. In the modern world,
the greater size of political communities, and above all, the separation
between spiritual and temporal authority (which placed the direction of
men’s consciences in other hands than those which controlled their
worldly affairs), prevented so great an interference by law in the
details of private life; but the engines of moral repression have been
wielded more strenuously against divergence from the reigning opinion in
self-regarding, than even in social matters; religion, the most powerful
of the elements which have entered into the formation of moral feeling,
having almost always been governed either by the ambition of a
hierarchy, seeking control over every Edition: current; Page: [227]
department of human conduct, or by the spirit of Puritanism. And some of
those modern reformers who have placed themselves in strongest
opposition to the religions of the past, have been noway behind either
churches or sects in their assertion of the right of spiritual
domination: M. Comte, in particular, whose social system, as unfolded in
his cSystèmec de Politique Positive,[*] aims at establishing (though by
moral more than by legal appliances) a despotism of society over the
individual, surpassing anything contemplated in the political ideal of
the most rigid disciplinarian among the ancient philosophers.

Apart from the peculiar tenets of individual thinkers, there is also in
the world at large an increasing inclination to stretch unduly the
powers of society over the individual, both by the force of opinion and
even by that of legislation: and as the tendency of all the changes
taking place in the world is to strengthen society, and diminish the
power of the individual, this encroachment is not one of the evils which
tend spontaneously to disappear, but, on the contrary, to grow more and
more formidable. The disposition of mankind, whether as rulers or as
fellow-citizens, to impose their own opinions and inclinations as a rule
of conduct on others, is so energetically supported by some of the best
and by some of the worst feelings incident to human nature, that it is
hardly ever kept under restraint by anything but want of power; and as
the power is not declining, but growing, unless a strong barrier of
moral conviction can be raised against the mischief, we must expect, in
the present circumstances of the world, to see it increase.

It will be convenient for the argument, if, instead of at once entering
upon the general thesis, we confine ourselves in the first instance to a
single branch of it, on which the principle here stated is, if not
fully, yet to a certain point, recognised by the current opinions. This
one branch is the Liberty of Thought: from which it is impossible to
separate the cognate liberty of speaking and of writing. Although these
liberties, to some considerable amount, form part of the political
morality of all countries which profess religious toleration and free
institutions, the grounds, both philosophical and practical, on which
they rest, are perhaps not so familiar to the general mind, nor so
thoroughly appreciated by many even of the leaders of opinion, as might
have been expected. Those grounds, when rightly understood, are of much
wider application than to only one division of the subject, and a
thorough consideration of this part of the question will be found the
best introduction to the remainder. Those to whom nothing which I am
about to say will be new, may therefore, I hope, excuse me, if on a
subject which for now three centuries has been so often discussed, I
venture on one discussion more.

Edition: current; Page: [228]


CHAPTER II: Of the Liberty of Thought and Discussion

the time, it is to be hoped, is gone by, when any defence would be
necessary of the “liberty of the press” as one of the securities against
corrupt or tyrannical government. No argument, we may suppose, can now
be needed, against permitting a legislature or an executive, not
identified in interest with the people, to prescribe opinions to them,
and determine what doctrines or what arguments they shall be allowed to
hear. This aspect of the question, besides, has been so often and so
triumphantly enforced by preceding writers, that it needs not be
specially insisted on in this place. Though the law of England, on the
subject of the press, is as servile to this day as it was in the time of
the Tudors, there is little danger of its being actually put in force
against political discussion, except during some temporary panic, when
fear of insurrection drives ministers and judges from their propriety;*
and, speaking Edition: current; Page: [229] generally, it is not, in
constitutional countries, to be apprehended, that the government,
whether completely responsible to the people or not, will often attempt
to control the expression of opinion, except when in doing so it makes
itself the organ of the general intolerance of the public. Let us
suppose, therefore, that the government is entirely at one with the
people, and never thinks of exerting any power of coercion unless in
agreement with what it conceives to be their voice. But I deny the right
of the people to exercise such coercion, either by themselves or by
their government. The power itself is illegitimate. The best government
has no more title to it than the worst. It is as noxious, or more
noxious, when exerted in accordance with public opinion, than when in
opposition to it. If all mankind minus one, were of one opinion, and
only one person were of the contrary opinion, mankind would be no more
justified in silencing that one person, than he, if he had the power,
would be justified in silencing mankind. Were an opinion a personal
possession of no value except to the owner; if to be obstructed in the
enjoyment of it were simply a private injury, it would make some
difference whether the injury was inflicted only on a few persons or on
many. But the peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion
is, that it is robbing the human race; posterity as well as the existing
generation; those who dissent from the opinion, still more than those
who hold it. If the opinion is right, they are deprived of the
opportunity of exchanging error for truth: if wrong, they lose, what is
almost as great a benefit, the clearer perception and livelier
impression of truth, produced by its collision with error.

It is necessary to consider separately these two hypotheses, each of
which has a distinct branch of the argument corresponding to it. We can
never be sure that the opinion we are endeavouring to stifle is a false
opinion; and if we were sure, stifling it would be an evil still.

First: the opinion which it is attempted to suppress by authority may
possibly be true. Those who desire to suppress it, of course deny its
truth; but they are not infallible. They have no authority to decide the
question for all mankind, and exclude every other person from the means
of judging. To refuse a hearing to an opinion, because they are sure
that it is false, is to assume that their certainty is the same thing as
absolute certainty. All silencing of discussion is an assumption of
infallibility. Its condemnation may be allowed to rest on this common
argument, not the worse for being common.

Unfortunately for the good sense of mankind, the fact of their
fallibility is far from carrying the weight in their practical judgment,
which is always allowed to it in theory; for while every one well knows
himself to be fallible, few think it necessary to take any precautions
against their own fallibility, or admit the supposition that any
opinion, of which they feel very certain, Edition: current; Page: [230]
may be one of the examples of the error to which they acknowledge
themselves to be liable. Absolute princes, or others who are accustomed
to unlimited deference, usually feel this complete confidence in their
own opinions on nearly all subjects. People more happily situated, who
sometimes hear their opinions disputed, and are not wholly unused to be
set right when they are wrong, place the same unbounded reliance only on
such of their opinions as are shared by all who surround them, or to
whom they habitually defer: for in proportion to a man’s want of
confidence in his own solitary judgment, does he usually repose, with
implicit trust, on the infallibility of “the world” in general. And the
world, to each individual, means the part of it with which he comes in
contact; his party, his sect, his church, his class of society: the man
may be called, by comparison, almost liberal and large-minded to whom it
means anything so comprehensive as his own country or his own age. Nor
is his faith in this collective authority at all shaken by his being
aware that other ages, countries, sects, churches, classes, and parties
have thought, and even now think, the exact reverse. He devolves upon
his own world the responsibility of being in the right against the
dissentient worlds of other people; and it never troubles him that mere
accident has decided which of these numerous worlds is the object of his
reliance, and that the same causes which make him a Churchman in London,
would have made him a Buddhist or a Confucian in Pekin. Yet it is as
evident in itself, as any amount of argument can make it, that ages are
no more infallible than individuals; every age having held many opinions
which subsequent ages have deemed not only false but absurd; and it is
as certain that many opinions, now general, will be rejected by future
ages, as it is that many, once general, are rejected by the present.

The objection likely to be made to this argument, would probably take
some such form as the following. There is no greater assumption of
infallibility in forbidding the propagation of error, than in any other
thing which is done by public authority on its own judgment and
responsibility. Judgment is given to men that they may use it. Because
it may be used erroneously, are men to be told that they ought not to
use it at all? To prohibit what they think pernicious, is not claiming
exemption from error, but fulfilling the duty incumbent on them,
although fallible, of acting on their conscientious conviction. If we
were never to act on our opinions, because those opinions may be wrong,
we should leave all our interests uncared for, and all our duties
unperformed. An objection which applies to all conduct, can be no valid
objection to any conduct in particular. It is the duty of governments,
and of individuals, to form the truest opinions they can; to form them
carefully, and never impose them upon others unless they are quite sure
of being right. But when they are sure (such reasoners may say), it is
not conscientiousness but cowardice to shrink from acting on their
Edition: current; Page: [231] opinions, and allow doctrines which they
honestly think dangerous to the welfare of mankind, either in this life
or in another, to be scattered abroad without restraint, because other
people, in less enlightened times, have persecuted opinions now believed
to be true. Let us take care, it may be said, not to make the same
mistake: but governments and nations have made mistakes in other things,
which are not denied to be fit subjects for the exercise of authority:
they have laid on bad taxes, made unjust wars. Ought we therefore to lay
on no taxes, and, under whatever provocation, make no wars? Men, and
governments, must act to the best of their ability. There is no such
thing as absolute certainty, but there is assurance sufficient for the
purposes of human life. We may, and must, assume our opinion to be true
for the guidance of our own conduct: and it is assuming no more when we
forbid bad men to pervert society by the propagation of opinions which
we regard as false and pernicious.

I answer, that it is assuming very much more. There is the greatest
difference between presuming an opinion to be true, because, with every
opportunity for contesting it, it has not been refuted, and assuming its
truth for the purpose of not permitting its refutation. Complete liberty
of contradicting and disproving our opinion, is the very condition which
justifies us in assuming its truth for purposes of action; and on no
other terms can a being with human faculties have any rational assurance
of being right.

When we consider either the history of opinion, or the ordinary conduct
of human life, to what is it to be ascribed that the one and the other
are no worse than they are? Not certainly to the inherent force of the
human understanding; for, on any matter not self-evident, there are
ninety-nine persons totally incapable of judging of it, for one who is
capable; and the capacity of the hundredth person is only comparative:
for the majority of the eminent men of every past generation held many
opinions now known to be erroneous, and did or approved numerous things
which no one will now justify. Why is it, then, that there is on the
whole a preponderance among mankind of rational opinions and rational
conduct? If there really is this preponderance—which there must be
unless human affairs are, and have always been, in an almost desperate
state—it is owing to a quality of the human mind, the source of
everything respectable in man either as an intellectual or as a moral
being, namely, that his errors are corrigible. He is capable of
rectifying his mistakes, by discussion and experience. Not by experience
alone. There must be discussion, to show how experience is to be
interpreted. Wrong opinions and practices gradually yield to fact and
argument: but facts and arguments, to produce any effect on the mind,
must be brought before it. Very few facts are able to tell their own
story, without comments to bring out their meaning. The whole strength
and value, then, of human judgment, depending on the one property, that
it can be set right Edition: current; Page: [232] when it is wrong,
reliance can be placed on it only when the means of setting it right are
kept constantly at hand. In the case of any person whose judgment is
really deserving of confidence, how has it become so? Because he has
kept his mind open to criticism of his opinions and conduct. Because it
has been his practice to listen to all that could be said against him;
to profit by as much of it as was just, and expound to himself, and upon
occasion to others, the fallacy of what was fallacious. Because he has
felt, that the only way in which a human being can make some approach to
knowing the whole of a subject, is by hearing what can be said about it
by persons of every variety of opinion, and studying all modes in which
it can be looked at by every character of mind. No wise man ever
acquired his wisdom in any mode but this; nor is it in the nature of
human intellect to become wise in any other manner. The steady habit of
correcting and completing his own opinion by collating it with those of
others, so far from causing doubt and hesitation in carrying it into
practice, is the only stable foundation for a just reliance on it: for,
being cognisant of all that can, at least obviously, be said against
him, and having taken up his position against all gainsayers—knowing
that he has sought for objections and difficulties, instead of avoiding
them, and has shut out no light which can be thrown upon the subject
from any quarter—he has a right to think his judgment better than that
of any person, or any multitude, who have not gone through a similar
process.

It is not too much to require that what the wisest of mankind, those who
are best entitled to trust their own judgment, find necessary to warrant
their relying on it, should be submitted to by that miscellaneous
collection of a few wise and many foolish individuals, called the
public. The most intolerant of churches, the Roman Catholic Church, even
at the canonization of a saint, admits, and listens patiently to, a
“devil’s advocate.” The holiest of men, it appears, cannot be admitted
to posthumous honours, until all that the devil could say against him is
known and weighed. If even the Newtonian philosophy were not permitted
to be questioned, mankind could not feel as complete assurance of its
truth as they now do. The beliefs which we have most warrant for, have
no safeguard to rest on, but a standing invitation to the whole world to
prove them unfounded. If the challenge is not accepted, or is accepted
and the attempt fails, we are far enough from certainty still; but we
have done the best that the existing state of human reason admits of; we
have neglected nothing that could give the truth a chance of reaching
us: if the lists are kept open, we may hope that if there be a better
truth, it will be found when the human mind is capable of receiving it;
and in the meantime we may rely on having attained such approach to
truth, as is possible in our own day. This is the amount of certainty
attainable by a fallible being, and this the sole way of attaining it.

Strange it is, that men should admit the validity of the arguments for
free Edition: current; Page: [233] discussion, but object to their being
“pushed to an extreme;” not seeing that unless the reasons are good for
an extreme case, they are not good for any case. Strange that they
should imagine that they are not assuming infallibility, when they
acknowledge that there should be free discussion on all subjects which
can possibly be doubtful, but think that some particular principle or
doctrine should be forbidden to be questioned because it is asoa
certain, that is, because they are certain that it is certain. To call
any proposition certain, while there is any one who would deny its
certainty if permitted, but who is not permitted, is to assume that we
ourselves, and those who agree with us, are the judges of certainty, and
judges without hearing the other side.

In the present age—which has been described as “destitute of faith, but
terrified at scepticism”[*]—in which people feel sure, not so much that
their opinions are true, as that they should not know what to do without
them—the claims of an opinion to be protected from public attack are
rested not so much on its truth, as on its importance to society. There
are, it is alleged, certain beliefs, so useful, not to say indispensable
to well-being, that it is as much the duty of governments to uphold
those beliefs, as to protect any other of the interests of society. In a
case of such necessity, and so directly in the line of their duty,
something less than infallibility may, it is maintained, warrant, and
even bind, governments, to act on their own opinion, confirmed by the
general opinion of mankind. It is also often argued, and still oftener
thought, that none but bad men would desire to weaken these salutary
beliefs; and there can be nothing wrong, it is thought, in restraining
bad men, and prohibiting what only such men would wish to practise. This
mode of thinking makes the justification of restraints on discussion not
a question of the truth of doctrines, but of their usefulness; and
flatters itself by that means to escape the responsibility of claiming
to be an infallible judge of opinions. But those who thus satisfy
themselves, do not perceive that the assumption of infallibility is
merely shifted from one point to another. The usefulness of an opinion
is itself matter of opinion: as disputable, as open to discussion, and
requiring discussion as much, as the opinion itself. There is the same
need of an infallible judge of opinions to decide an opinion to be
noxious, as to decide it to be false, unless the opinion condemned has
full opportunity of defending itself. And it will not do to say that the
heretic may be allowed to maintain the utility or harmlessness of his
opinion, though forbidden to maintain its truth. The truth of an opinion
is part of its utility. If we would know whether or not it is desirable
that a proposition should be believed, is it possible to exclude the
consideration of whether or not it is true? In the opinion, not of bad
men, Edition: current; Page: [234] but of the best men, no belief which
is contrary to truth can be really useful: and can you prevent such men
from urging that plea, when they are charged with culpability for
denying some doctrine which they are told is useful, but which they
believe to be false? Those who are on the side of received opinions,
never fail to take all possible advantage of this plea; you do not find
them handling the question of utility as if it could be completely
abstracted from that of truth: on the contrary, it is, above all,
because their doctrine is bthe “truth,”b that the knowledge or the
belief of it is held to be so indispensable. There can be no fair
discussion of the question of usefulness, when an argument so vital may
be employed on one side, but not on the other. And in point of fact,
when law or public feeling do not permit the truth of an opinion to be
disputed, they are just as little tolerant of a denial of its
usefulness. The utmost they allow is an extenuation of its absolute
necessity, or of the positive guilt of rejecting it.

In order more fully to illustrate the mischief of denying a hearing to
opinions because we, in our own judgment, have condemned them, it will
be desirable to fix down the discussion to a concrete case; and I
choose, by preference, the cases which are least favourable to me—in
which the argument against freedom of opinion, both on the score of
truth and on that of utility, is considered the strongest. Let the
opinions impugned be the belief in a God and in a future state, or any
of the commonly received doctrines of morality. To fight the battle on
such ground, gives a great advantage to an unfair antagonist; since he
will be sure to say (and many who have no desire to be unfair will say
it internally), Are these the doctrines which you do not deem
sufficiently certain to be taken under the protection of law? Is the
belief in a God one of the opinions, to feel sure of which, you hold to
be assuming infallibility? But I must be permitted to observe, that it
is not the feeling sure of a doctrine (be it what it may) which I call
an assumption of infallibility. It is the undertaking to decide that
question for others, without allowing them to hear what can be said on
the contrary side. And I denounce and reprobate this pretension not the
less, if put forth on the side of my most solemn convictions. However
positive any one’s persuasion may be, not only of the falsity but of the
pernicious consequences—not only of the pernicious consequences, but (to
adopt expressions which I altogether condemn) the immorality and impiety
of an opinion; yet if, in pursuance of that private judgment, though
backed by the public judgment of his country or his cotemporaries, he
prevents the opinion from being heard in its defence, he assumes
infallibility. And so far from the assumption being less objectionable
or less dangerous because the opinion is called immoral or impious, this
is the case of all others in which it is most fatal. These are exactly
the occasions on which the men of one generation commit Edition:
current; Page: [235] those dreadful mistakes, which excite the
astonishment and horror of posterity. It is among such that we find the
instances memorable in history, when the arm of the law has been
employed to root out the best men and the noblest doctrines; with
deplorable success as to the men, though some of the doctrines have
survived to be (as if in mockery) invoked, in defence of similar conduct
towards those who dissent from them, or from their received
interpretation.

Mankind can hardly be too often reminded, that there was once a man
named Socrates, between whom and the legal authorities and public
opinion of his time, there took place a memorable collision. Born in an
age and country abounding in individual greatness, this man has been
handed down to us by those who best knew both him and the age, as the
most virtuous man in it; while we know him as the head and prototype of
all subsequent teachers of virtue, the source equally of the lofty
inspiration of Plato and the judicious utilitarianism of Aristotle, “i
maëstri di color che sanno,”[*] the two headsprings of ethical as of all
other philosophy. This acknowledged master of all the eminent thinkers
who have since lived—whose fame, still growing after more than two
thousand years, all but outweighs the whole remainder of the names which
make his native city illustrious—was put to death by his countrymen,
after a judicial conviction, for impiety and immorality. Impiety, in
denying the gods recognised by the State; indeed his accuser asserted
(see the Apologia) that he believed in no gods at all. Immorality, in
being, by his doctrines and instructions, a “corrupter of youth.”[†] Of
these charges the tribunal, there is every ground for believing,
honestly found him guilty, and condemned the man who probably of all
then born had deserved best of mankind, to be put to death as a
criminal.

To pass from this to the only other instance of judicial iniquity, the
mention of which, after the condemnation of Socrates, would not be an
anti-climax: the event which took place on Calvary rather more than
eighteen hundred years ago. The man who left on the memory of those who
witnessed his life and conversation, such an impression of his moral
grandeur, that eighteen subsequent centuries have done homage to him as
the Almighty in person, was ignominiously put to death, as what? As a
blasphemer. Men did not merely mistake their benefactor; they mistook
him for the exact contrary of what he was, and treated him as that
prodigy of impiety, which they themselves are now held to be, for their
treatment of him. The feelings with which mankind now regard these
lamentable transactions, especially the later of the two, render them
extremely unjust Edition: current; Page: [236] in their judgment of the
unhappy actors. These were, to all appearance, not bad men—not worse
than men commonly are, but rather the contrary; men who possessed in a
full, or somewhat more than a full measure, the religious, moral, and
patriotic feelings of their time and people: the very kind of men who,
in all times, our own included, have every chance of passing through
life blameless and respected. The high-priest who rent his garments when
the words were pronounced,[*] which, according to all the ideas of his
country, constituted the blackest guilt, was in all probability quite as
sincere in his horror and indignation, as the generality of respectable
and pious men now are in the religious and moral sentiments they
profess; and most of those who now shudder at his conduct, if they had
lived in his time, and been born Jews, would have acted precisely as he
did. Orthodox Christians who are tempted to think that those who stoned
to death the first martyrs must have been worse men than they themselves
are, ought to remember that one of those persecutors was Saint Paul.[†]

Let us add one more example, the most striking of all, if the
impressiveness of an error is measured by the wisdom and virtue of him
who falls into it. If ever any one, possessed of power, had grounds for
thinking himself the best and most enlightened among his cotemporaries,
it was the Emperor Marcus Aurelius. Absolute monarch of the whole
civilized world, he preserved through life not only the most unblemished
justice, but what was less to be expected from his Stoical breeding, the
tenderest heart. The few failings which are attributed to him, were all
on the side of indulgence: while his writings, the highest ethical
product of the ancient mind, differ scarcely perceptibly, if they differ
at all, from the most characteristic teachings of Christ. This man, a
better Christian in all but the dogmatic sense of the word, than almost
any of the ostensibly Christian sovereigns who have since reigned,
persecuted Christianity. Placed at the summit of all the previous
attainments of humanity, with an open, unfettered intellect, and a
character which led him of himself to embody in his moral writings the
Christian ideal, he yet failed to see that Christianity was to be a good
and not an evil to the world, with his duties to which he was so deeply
penetrated. Existing society he knew to be in a deplorable state. But
such as it was, he saw, or thought he saw, that it was held together,
and prevented from being worse, by belief and reverence of the received
divinities. As a ruler of mankind, he deemed it his duty not to suffer
society to fall in pieces: and saw not how, if its existing ties were
removed, any others could be formed which could again knit it together.
The new religion openly aimed at dissolving these ties: unless,
therefore, it was his duty to adopt that religion, it seemed to be his
duty to put it down. Inasmuch then as the Edition: current; Page: [237]
theology of Christianity did not appear to him true or of divine origin:
inasmuch as this strange history of a crucified God was not credible to
him, and a system which purported to rest entirely upon a foundation to
him so wholly unbelievable, could not be foreseen by him to be that
renovating agency which, after all abatements, it has in fact proved to
be; the gentlest and most amiable of philosophers and rulers, under a
solemn sense of duty, authorized the persecution of Christianity. To my
mind this is one of the most tragical facts in all history. It is a
bitter thought, how different a thing the Christianity of the world
might have been, if the Christian faith had been adopted as the religion
of the empire under the auspices of Marcus Aurelius instead of those of
Constantine. But it would be equally unjust to him and false to truth,
to deny, that no one plea which can be urged for punishing
anti-Christian teaching, was wanting to Marcus Aurelius for punishing,
as he did, the propagation of Christianity. No Christian more firmly
believes that Atheism is false, and tends to the dissolution of society,
than Marcus Aurelius believed the same things of Christianity: he who,
of all men then living, might have been thought the most capable of
appreciating it. Unless any one who approves of punishment for the
promulgation of opinions, flatters himself that he is a wiser and better
man than Marcus Aurelius—more deeply versed in the wisdom of his time,
more elevated in his intellect above it—more earnest in his search for
truth, or more singleminded in his devotion to it when found;—let him
abstain from that assumption of the joint infallibility of himself and
the multitude, which the great Antoninus made with so unfortunate a
result.

Aware of the impossibility of defending the use of punishment for
restraining irreligious opinions, by any argument which will not justify
Marcus Antoninus, the enemies of religious freedom, when hard pressed,
occasionally accept this consequence, and say, with Dr. Johnson, that
the persecutors of Christianity were in the right;[*] that persecution
is an ordeal through which truth ought to pass, and always passes
successfully, legal penalties being, in the end, powerless against
truth, though sometimes beneficially effective against mischievous
errors. This is a form of the argument for religious intolerance,
sufficiently remarkable not to be passed without notice.

A theory which maintains that truth may justifiably be persecuted
because persecution cannot possibly do it any harm, cannot be charged
with being intentionally hostile to the reception of new truths; but we
cannot commend the generosity of its dealing with the persons to whom
mankind are indebted for them. To discover to the world something which
deeply concerns it, and of which it was previously ignorant; to prove to
it that it had been mistaken on some vital point of temporal or
spiritual interest, is Edition: current; Page: [238] as important a
service as a human being can render to his fellow-creatures, and in
certain cases, as in those of the early Christians and of the Reformers,
those who think with Dr. Johnson believe it to have been the most
precious gift which could be bestowed on mankind. That the authors of
such splendid benefits should be requited by martyrdom; that their
reward should be to be dealt with as the vilest of criminals, is not,
upon this theory, a deplorable error and misfortune, for which humanity
should mourn in sackcloth and ashes, but the normal and justifiable
state of things. The propounder of a new truth, according to this
doctrine, should stand, as stood, in the legislation of the Locrians,
the proposer of a new law, with a halter round his neck, to be instantly
tightened if the public assembly did not, on hearing his reasons, then
and there adopt his proposition.[*] People who defend this mode of
treating benefactors, cannot be supposed to set much value on the
benefit; and I believe this view of the subject is mostly confined to
the sort of persons who think that new truths may have been desirable
once, but that we have had enough of them now.

But, indeed, the dictum that truth always triumphs over persecution, is
one of those pleasant falsehoods which men repeat after one another till
they pass into commonplaces, but which all experience refutes. History
teems with instances of truth put down by persecution. If not suppressed
for ever, it may be thrown back for centuries. To speak only of
religious opinions: the Reformation broke out at least twenty times
before Luther, and was put down. Arnold of Brescia was put down. Fra
Dolcino was put down. Savonarola was put down. The Albigeois were put
down. The Vaudois were put down. The Lollards were put down. The
Hussites were put down. Even after the era of Luther, wherever
persecution was persisted in, it was successful. In Spain, Italy,
Flanders, the Austrian empire. Protestantism was rooted out; and, most
likely, would have been so in England, had Queen Mary lived, or Queen
Elizabeth died. Persecution has always succeeded, save where the
heretics were too strong a party to be effectually persecuted. No
reasonable person can doubt that Christianity might have been extirpated
in the Roman Empire. It spread, and became predominant, because the
persecutions were only occasional, lasting but a short time, and
separated by long intervals of almost undisturbed propagandism. It is a
piece of idle sentimentality that truth, merely as truth, has any
inherent power denied to error, of prevailing against the dungeon and
the stake. Men are not more zealous for truth than they often are for
error, and a sufficient application of legal or even of social penalties
will generally succeed Edition: current; Page: [239] in stopping the
propagation of either. The real advantage which truth has, consists in
this, that when an opinion is true, it may be extinguished once, twice,
or many times, but in the course of ages there will generally be found
persons to rediscover it, until some one of its reappearances falls on a
time when from favourable circumstances it escapes persecution until it
has made such head as to withstand all subsequent attempts to suppress
it.

It will be said, that we do not now put to death the introducers of new
opinions: we are not like our fathers who slew the prophets, we even
build sepulchres to them. It is true we no longer put heretics to death;
and the amount of penal infliction which modern feeling would probably
tolerate, even against the most obnoxious opinions, is not sufficient to
extirpate them. But let us not flatter ourselves that we are yet free
from the stain even of legal persecution. Penalties for opinion, or at
least for its expression, still exist by law; and their enforcement is
not, even in these times, so unexampled as to make it at all incredible
that they may some day be revived in full force. In the year 1857, at
the summer assizes of the county of Cornwall, an unfortunate man,* said
to be of unexceptionable conduct in all relations of life, was sentenced
to twenty-one months’ imprisonment, for uttering, and writing on a gate,
some offensive words concerning Christianity. Within a month of the same
time, at the Old Bailey, two persons, on two separate occasions,† were
rejected as jurymen, and one of them grossly insulted by the judge and
by one of the counsel, because they honestly declared that they had no
theological belief; and a third, a foreigner,‡ for the same reason, was
denied justice against a thief. This refusal of redress took place in
virtue of the legal doctrine, that no person can be allowed to give
evidence in a court of justice, who does not profess belief in a God
(any god is sufficient) and in a future state; which is equivalent to
declaring such persons to be outlaws, excluded from the protection of
the tribunals; who may not only be robbed or assaulted with impunity, if
no one but themselves, or persons of similar opinions, be present, but
any one else may be robbed or assaulted with impunity, if the proof of
the fact depends on their evidence. The assumption on which this is
grounded, is that the oath is worthless, of a person who does not
believe in a future state; a proposition which betokens much ignorance
of history in those who assent to it (since it is historically true that
a large proportion of infidels in all ages have been persons of
distinguished integrity and honour); and would be maintained by no one
who had the smallest conception how many of the persons in greatest
repute with the world, both for virtues and for attainments, are
Edition: current; Page: [240] well known, at least to their intimates,
to be unbelievers. The rule, besides, is suicidal, and cuts away its own
foundation. Under pretence that atheists must be liars, it admits the
testimony of all atheists who are willing to lie, and rejects only those
who brave the obloquy of publicly confessing a detested creed rather
than affirm a falsehood. A rule thus self-convicted of absurdity so far
as regards its professed purpose, can be kept in force only as a badge
of hatred, a relic of persecution; a persecution, too, having the
peculiarity, that the qualification for undergoing it, is the being
clearly proved not to deserve it. The rule, and the theory it implies,
are hardly less insulting to believers than to infidels. For if he who
does not believe in a future state, necessarily lies, it follows that
they who do believe are only prevented from lying, if prevented they
are, by the fear of hell. We will not do the authors and abettors of the
rule the injury of supposing, that the conception which they have formed
of Christian virtue is drawn from their own consciousness.

These, indeed, are but rags and remnants of persecution, and may be
thought to be not so much an indication of the wish to persecute, as an
example of that very frequent infirmity of English minds, which makes
them take a preposterous pleasure in the assertion of a bad principle,
when they are no longer bad enough to desire to carry it really into
practice. But unhappily there is no security in the state of the public
mind, that the suspension of worse forms of legal persecution, which has
lasted for about the space of a generation, will continue. In this age
the quiet surface of routine is as often ruffled by attempts to
resuscitate past evils, as to introduce new benefits. What is boasted of
at the present time as the revival of religion, is always, in narrow and
uncultivated minds, at least as much the revival of bigotry; and where
there is the strong permanent leaven of intolerance in the feelings of a
people, which at all times abides in the middle classes of this country,
it needs but little to provoke them into actively persecuting those whom
they have never ceased to think proper objects of persecution.* Edition:
current; Page: [241] For it is this—it is the opinions men entertain,
and the feelings they cherish, respecting those who disown the beliefs
they deem important, which makes this country not a place of mental
freedom. For a long time past, the chief mischief of the legal penalties
is that they strengthen the social stigma. It is that stigma which is
really effective, and so effective is it, that the profession of
opinions which are under the ban of society is much less common in
England, than is, in many other countries, the avowal of those which
incur risk of judicial punishment. In respect to all persons but those
whose pecuniary circumstances make them independent of the good will of
other people, opinion, on this subject, is as efficacious as law; men
might as well be imprisoned, as excluded from the means of earning their
bread. Those whose bread is already secured, and who desire no favours
from men in power, or from bodies of men, or from the public, have
nothing to fear from the open avowal of any opinions, but to be
ill-thought of and ill-spoken of, and this it ought not to require a
very heroic mould to enable them to bear. There is no room for any
appeal ad misericordiam in behalf of such persons. But though we do not
now inflict so much evil on those who think differently from us, as it
was formerly our custom to do, it may be that we do ourselves as much
evil as ever by our treatment of them. Socrates was put to death, but
the Socratic philosophy rose like the sun in heaven, and spread its
illumination over the whole intellectual firmament. Christians were cast
to the lions, but the Christian church grew up a stately and spreading
tree, overtopping the older and less vigorous growths, and stifling them
by its shade. Our merely social intolerance kills no one, roots out no
opinions, but induces men to disguise them, or to abstain from any
active effort for their diffusion. With us, heretical opinions do not
perceptibly gain, or even lose, ground in each decade or generation;
they never blaze out far and wide, but continue to smoulder in the
narrow circles of thinking and studious persons among whom they
originate, without ever lighting up the general affairs of mankind with
either a true or a deceptive light. And thus is kept up a state of
things very satisfactory to some minds, because, without the unpleasant
process of fining or imprisoning anybody, it maintains all prevailing
opinions outwardly undisturbed, while it does not absolutely interdict
the exercise of reason by dissentients afflicted with the malady of
Edition: current; Page: [242] thought. A convenient plan for having
peace in the intellectual world, and keeping all things going on therein
very much as they do already. But the price paid for this sort of
intellectual pacification, is the sacrifice of the entire moral courage
of the human mind. A state of things in which a large portion of the
most active and inquiring intellects find it advisable to keep the
cgeneralc principles and grounds of their convictions within their own
breasts, and attempt, in what they address to the public, to fit as much
as they can of their own conclusions to premises which they have
internally renounced, cannot send forth the open, fearless characters,
and logical, consistent intellects who once adorned the thinking world.
The sort of men who can be looked for under it, are either mere
conformers to commonplace, or time-servers for truth, whose arguments on
all great subjects are meant for their hearers, and are not those which
have convinced themselves. Those who avoid this alternative, do so by
narrowing their thoughts and interest to things which can be spoken of
without venturing within the region of principles, that is, to small
practical matters, which would come right of themselves, if but the
minds of mankind were strengthened and enlarged, and which will never be
made effectually right until then: while that which would strengthen and
enlarge men’s minds, free and daring speculation on the highest
subjects, is abandoned.

Those in whose eyes this reticence on the part of heretics is no evil,
should consider in the first place, that in consequence of it there is
never any fair and thorough discussion of heretical opinions; and that
such of them as could not stand such a discussion, though they may be
prevented from spreading, do not disappear. But it is not the minds of
heretics that are deteriorated most, by the ban placed on all inquiry
which does not end in the orthodox conclusions. The greatest harm done
is to those who are not heretics, and whose whole mental development is
cramped, and their reason cowed, by the fear of heresy. Who can compute
what the world loses in the multitude of promising intellects combined
with timid characters, who dare not follow out any bold, vigorous,
independent train of thought, lest it should land them in something
which would admit of being considered irreligious or immoral? Among them
we may occasionally see some man of deep conscientiousness, and subtle
and refined understanding, who spends a life in sophisticating with an
intellect which he cannot silence, and exhausts the resources of
ingenuity in attempting to reconcile the promptings of his conscience
and reason with orthodoxy, which yet he does not, perhaps, to the end
succeed in doing. No one can be a great thinker who does not recognise,
that as a thinker it is his first duty to follow his intellect to
whatever conclusions it may lead. Truth gains more even by the errors of
one who, with due study and preparation, thinks for himself, than by the
true opinions Edition: current; Page: [243] of those who only hold them
because they do not suffer themselves to think. Not that it is solely,
or chiefly, to form great thinkers, that freedom of thinking is
required. On the contrary, it is as much and even more indispensable, to
enable average human beings to attain the mental stature which they are
capable of. There have been, and may again be, great individual
thinkers, in a general atmosphere of mental slavery. But there never has
been, nor ever will be, in that atmosphere, an intellectually active
people. dWhend any people has made a temporary approach to such a
character, it has been because the dread of heterodox speculation was
for a time suspended. Where there is a tacit convention that principles
are not to be disputed; where the discussion of the greatest questions
which can occupy humanity is considered to be closed, we cannot hope to
find that generally high scale of mental activity which has made some
periods of history so remarkable. Never when controversy avoided the
subjects which are large and important enough to kindle enthusiasm, was
the mind of a people stirred up from its foundations, and the impulse
given which raised even persons of the most ordinary intellect to
something of the dignity of thinking beings. Of such we have had an
example in the condition of Europe during the times immediately
following the Reformation; another, though limited to the Continent and
to a more cultivated class, in the speculative movement of the latter
half of the eighteenth century; and a third, of still briefer duration,
in the intellectual fermentation of Germany during the Goethian and
Fichtean period. These periods differed widely in the particular
opinions which they developed; but were alike in this, that during all
three the yoke of authority was broken. In each, an old mental despotism
had been thrown off, and no new one had yet taken its place. The impulse
given at these three periods has made Europe what it now is. Every
single improvement which has taken place either in the human mind or in
institutions, may be traced distinctly to one or other of them.
Appearances have for some time indicated that all three impulses are
well nigh spent; and we can expect no fresh start, until we again assert
our mental freedom.

Let us now pass to the second division of the argument, and dismissing
the supposition that any of the received opinions may be false, let us
assume them to be true, and examine into the worth of the manner in
which they are likely to be held, when their truth is not freely and
openly canvassed. However unwillingly a person who has a strong opinion
may admit the possibility that his opinion may be false, he ought to be
moved by the consideration that however true it may be, if it is not
fully, frequently, and fearlessly discussed, it will be held as a dead
dogma, not a living truth.

There is a class of persons (happily not quite so numerous as formerly)
Edition: current; Page: [244] who think it enough if a person assents
undoubtingly to what they think true, though he has no knowledge
whatever of the grounds of the opinion, and could not make a tenable
defence of it against the most superficial objections. Such persons, if
they can once get their creed taught from authority, naturally think
that no good, and some harm, comes of its being allowed to be
questioned. Where their influence prevails, they make it nearly
impossible for the received opinion to be rejected wisely and
considerately, though it may still be rejected rashly and ignorantly;
for to shut out discussion entirely is seldom possible, and when it once
gets in, beliefs not grounded on conviction are apt to give way before
the slightest semblance of an argument. Waving, however, this
possibility—assuming that the true opinion abides in the mind, but
abides as a prejudice, a belief independent of, and proof against,
argument—this is not the way in which truth ought to be held by a
rational being. This is not knowing the truth. Truth, thus held, is but
one superstition the more, accidentally clinging to the words which
enunciate a truth.

If the intellect and judgment of mankind ought to be cultivated, a thing
which Protestants at least do not deny, on what can these faculties be
more appropriately exercised by any one, than on the things which
concern him so much that it is considered necessary for him to hold
opinions on them? If the cultivation of the understanding consists in
one thing more than in another, it is surely in learning the grounds of
one’s own opinions. Whatever people believe, on subjects on which it is
of the first importance to believe rightly, they ought to be able to
defend against at least the common objections. But, some one may say,
“Let them be taught the grounds of their opinions. It does not follow
that opinions must be merely parroted because they are never heard
controverted. Persons who learn geometry do not simply commit the
theorems to memory, but understand and learn likewise the
demonstrations; and it would be absurd to say that they remain ignorant
of the grounds of geometrical truths, because they never hear any one
deny, and attempt to disprove them.” Undoubtedly: and such teaching
suffices on a subject like mathematics, where there is nothing at all to
be said on the wrong side of the question. The peculiarity of the
evidence of mathematical truths is, that all the argument is on one
side. There are no objections, and no answers to objections. But on
every subject on which difference of opinion is possible, the truth
depends on a balance to be struck between two sets of conflicting
reasons. Even in natural philosophy, there is always some other
explanation possible of the same facts; some geocentric theory instead
of heliocentric, some phlogiston instead of oxygen; and it has to be
shown why that other theory cannot be the true one: and until this is
shown, and until we know how it is shown, we do not understand the
grounds of our opinion. But when we turn to subjects infinitely more
complicated, to morals, Edition: current; Page: [245] religion,
politics, social relations, and the business of life, three-fourths of
the arguments for every disputed opinion consist in dispelling the
appearances which favour some opinion different from it. The greatest
orator, save one,[*] of antiquity, has left it on record that he always
studied his adversary’s case with as great, if not with still greater,
intensity than even his own. What Cicero practised as the means of
forensic success, requires to be imitated by all who study any subject
in order to arrive at the truth. He who knows only his own side of the
case, knows little of that. His reasons may be good, and no one may have
been able to refute them. But if he is equally unable to refute the
reasons on the opposite side; if he does not so much as know what they
are, he has no ground for preferring either opinion. The rational
position for him would be suspension of judgment, and unless he contents
himself with that, he is either led by authority, or adopts, like the
generality of the world, the side to which he feels most inclination.
Nor is it enough that he should hear the arguments of adversaries from
his own teachers, presented as they state them, and accompanied by what
they offer as refutations. That is not the way to do justice to the
arguments, or bring them into real contact with his own mind. He must be
able to hear them from persons who actually believe them; who defend
them in earnest, and do their very utmost for them. He must know them in
their most plausible and persuasive form; he must feel the whole force
of the difficulty which the true view of the subject has to encounter
and dispose of; else he will never really possess himself of the portion
of truth which meets and removes that difficulty. Ninety-nine in a
hundred of what are called educated men are in this condition; even of
those who can argue fluently for their opinions. Their conclusion may be
true, but it might be false for anything they know: they have never
thrown themselves into the mental position of those who think
differently from them, and considered what such persons may have to say;
and consequently they do not, in any proper sense of the word, know the
doctrine which they themselves profess. They do not know those parts of
it which explain and justify the remainder; the considerations which
show that a fact which seemingly conflicts with another is reconcilable
with it, or that, of two apparently strong reasons, one and not the
other ought to be preferred. All that part of the truth which turns the
scale, and decides the judgment of a completely informed mind, they are
strangers to; nor is it ever really known, but to those who have
attended equally and impartially to both sides, and endeavoured to see
the reasons of both in the strongest light. So essential is this
discipline to a real understanding of moral and human subjects, that if
opponents of all important truths do not exist, it is indispensable to
imagine them, and supply them with the strongest arguments which the
most skilful devil’s advocate can conjure up.

Edition: current; Page: [246]
To abate the force of these considerations, an enemy of free discussion
may be supposed to say, that there is no necessity for mankind in
general to know and understand all that can be said against or for their
opinions by philosophers and theologians. That it is not needful for
common men to be able to expose all the misstatements or fallacies of an
ingenious opponent. That it is enough if there is always somebody
capable of answering them, so that nothing likely to mislead
uninstructed persons remains unrefuted. That simple minds, having been
taught the obvious grounds of the truths inculcated on them, may trust
to authority for the rest, and being aware that they have neither
knowledge nor talent to resolve every difficulty which can be raised,
may repose in the assurance that all those which have been raised have
been or can be answered, by those who are specially trained to the task.

Conceding to this view of the subject the utmost that can be claimed for
it by those most easily satisfied with the amount of understanding of
truth which ought to accompany the belief of it; even so, the argument
for free discussion is no way weakened. For even this doctrine
acknowledges that mankind ought to have a rational assurance that all
objections have been satisfactorily answered; and how are they to be
answered if that which requires to be answered is not spoken? or how can
the answer be known to be satisfactory, if the objectors have no
opportunity of showing that it is unsatisfactory? If not the public, at
least the philosophers and theologians who are to resolve the
difficulties, must make themselves familiar with those difficulties in
their most puzzling form: and this cannot be accomplished unless they
are freely stated, and placed in the most advantageous light which they
admit of. The Catholic Church has its own way of dealing with this
embarrassing problem. It makes a broad separation between those who can
be permitted to receive its doctrines on conviction, and those who must
accept them on trust. Neither, indeed, are allowed any choice as to what
they will accept; but the clergy, such at least as can be fully confided
in, may admissibly and meritoriously make themselves acquainted with the
arguments of opponents, in order to answer them, and may, therefore,
read heretical books; the laity, not unless by special permission, hard
to be obtained. This discipline recognises a knowledge of the enemy’s
case as beneficial to the teachers but finds means, consistent with
this, of denying it to the rest of the world: thus giving to the élite
more mental culture, though not more mental freedom, than it allows to
the mass. By this device it succeeds in obtaining the kind of mental
superiority which its purposes require; for though culture without
freedom never made a large and liberal mind, it can make a clever nisi
prius advocate of a cause. But in countries professing Protestantism,
this resource is denied; since Protestants hold, at least in theory,
that the responsibility for the choice of a religion must be borne by
each for himself, and cannot be thrown off upon teachers. Besides, in
the Edition: current; Page: [247] present state of the world, it is
practically impossible that writings which are read by the instructed
can be kept from the uninstructed. If the teachers of mankind are to be
cognisant of all that they ought to know, everything must be free to be
written and published without restraint.

If, however, the mischievous operation of the absence of free
discussion, when the received opinions are true, were confined to
leaving men ignorant of the grounds of those opinions, it might be
thought that this, if an intellectual, is no moral evil, and does not
affect the worth of the opinions, regarded in their influence on the
character. The fact, however, is, that not only the grounds of the
opinion are forgotten in the absence of discussion, but too often the
meaning of the opinion itself. The words which convey it, cease to
suggest ideas, or suggest only a small portion of those they were
originally employed to communicate. Instead of a vivid conception and a
living belief, there remain only a few phrases retained by rote; or, if
any part, the shell and husk only of the meaning is retained, the finer
essence being lost. The great chapter in human history which this fact
occupies and fills, cannot be too earnestly studied and meditated on.

It is illustrated in the experience of almost all ethical doctrines and
religious creeds. They are all full of meaning and vitality to those who
originate them, and to the direct disciples of the originators. Their
meaning continues to be felt in undiminished strength, and is perhaps
brought out into even fuller consciousness, so long as the struggle
lasts to give the doctrine or creed an ascendancy over other creeds. At
last it either prevails, and becomes the general opinion, or its
progress stops; it keeps possession of the ground it has gained, but
ceases to spread further. When either of these results has become
apparent, controversy on the subject flags, and gradually dies away. The
doctrine has taken its place, if not as a received opinion, as one of
the admitted sects or divisions of opinion: those who hold it have
generally inherited, not adopted it; and conversion from one of these
doctrines to another, being now an exceptional fact, occupies little
place in the thoughts of their professors. Instead of being, as at
first, constantly on the alert either to defend themselves against the
world, or to bring the world over to them, they have subsided into
acquiescence, and neither listen, when they can help it, to arguments
against their creed, nor trouble dissentients (if there be such) with
arguments in its favour. From this time may usually be dated the decline
in the living power of the doctrine. We often hear the teachers of all
creeds lamenting the difficulty of keeping up in the minds of believers
a lively apprehension of the truth which they nominally recognise, so
that it may penetrate the feelings, and acquire a real mastery over the
conduct. No such difficulty is complained of while the creed is still
fighting for its existence; even the weaker combatants then know and
feel what they are fighting for, and the difference between it and other
doctrines; and in Edition: current; Page: [248] that period of every
creed’s existence, not a few persons may be found, who have realized its
fundamental principles in all the forms of thought, have weighed and
considered them in all their important bearings, and have experienced
the full effect on the character, which belief in that creed ought to
produce in a mind thoroughly imbued with it. But when it has come to be
an hereditary creed, and to be received passively, not actively—when the
mind is no longer compelled, in the same degree as at first, to exercise
its vital powers on the questions which its belief presents to it, there
is a progressive tendency to forget all of the belief except the
formularies, or to give it a dull and torpid assent, as if accepting it
on trust dispensed with the necessity of realizing it in consciousness,
or testing it by personal experience; until it almost ceases to connect
itself at all with the inner life of the human being. Then are seen the
cases, so frequent in this age of the world as almost to form the
majority, in which the creed remains as it were outside the mind,
incrusting and petrifying it against all other influences addressed to
the higher parts of our nature; manifesting its power by not suffering
any fresh and living conviction to get in, but itself doing nothing for
the mind or heart, except standing sentinel over them to keep them
vacant.

To what an extent doctrines intrinsically fitted to make the deepest
impression upon the mind may remain in it as dead beliefs, without being
ever realized in the imagination, the feelings, or the understanding, is
exemplified by the manner in which the majority of believers hold the
doctrines of Christianity. By Christianity I here mean what is accounted
such by all churches and sects—the maxims and precepts contained in the
New Testament. These are considered sacred, and accepted as laws, by all
professing Christians. Yet it is scarcely too much to say that not one
Christian in a thousand guides or tests his individual conduct by
reference to those laws. The standard to which he does refer it, is the
custom of his nation, his class, or his religious profession. He has
thus, on the one hand, a collection of ethical maxims, which he believes
to have been vouchsafed to him by infallible wisdom as rules for his
government; and on the other, a set of every-day judgments and
practices, which go a certain length with some of those maxims, not so
great a length with others, stand in direct opposition to some, and are,
on the whole, a compromise between the Christian creed and the interests
and suggestions of worldly life. To the first of these standards he
gives his homage; to the other his real allegiance. All Christians
believe that the blessed are the poor and humble, and those who are
ill-used by the world; that it is easier for a camel to pass through the
eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven; that
they should judge not, lest they be judged; that they should swear not
at all; that they should love their neighbour as themselves; that if one
take their cloak, they should give him their coat also; that they should
take no thought for the morrow; Edition: current; Page: [249] that if
they would be perfect, they should sell all that they have and give it
to the poor.[*] They are not insincere when they say that they believe
these things. They do believe them, as people believe what they have
always heard lauded and never discussed. But in the sense of that living
belief which regulates conduct, they believe these doctrines just up to
the point to which it is usual to act upon them. The doctrines in their
integrity are serviceable to pelt adversaries with; and it is understood
that they are to be put forward (when possible) as the reasons for
whatever people do that they think laudable. But any one who reminded
them that the maxims require an infinity of things which they never even
think of doing, would gain nothing but to be classed among those very
unpopular characters who affect to be better than other people. The
doctrines have no hold on ordinary believers—are not a power in their
minds. They have an habitual respect for the sound of them, but no
feeling which spreads from the words to the things signified, and forces
the mind to take them in, and make them conform to the formula. Whenever
conduct is concerned, they look round for Mr. A and B to direct them how
far to go in obeying Christ.

Now we may be well assured that the case was not thus, but far
otherwise, with the early Christians. Had it been thus, Christianity
never would have expanded from an obscure sect of the despised Hebrews
into the religion of the Roman empire. When their enemies said, “See how
these Christians love one another”[†] (a remark not likely to be made by
anybody now), they assuredly had a much livelier feeling of the meaning
of their creed than they have ever had since. And to this cause,
probably, it is chiefly owing that Christianity now makes so little
progress in extending its domain, and after eighteen centuries, is still
nearly confined to Europeans and the descendants of Europeans. Even with
the strictly religious, who are much in earnest about their doctrines,
and attach a greater amount of meaning to many of them than people in
general, it commonly happens that the part which is thus comparatively
active in their minds is that which was made by Calvin, or Knox, or some
such person much nearer in character to themselves. The savings of
Christ coexist passively in their minds, producing hardly any effect
beyond what is caused by mere listening to words so amiable and bland.
There are many reasons, doubtless, why doctrines which are the badge of
a sect retain more of their vitality than those common to all recognised
sects, and why more pains are taken by teachers to keep their meaning
alive; but one reason certainly is, that the peculiar doctrines are more
questioned, and have to be oftener defended against open gainsayers.
Edition: current; Page: [250] Both teachers and learners go to sleep at
their post, as soon as there is no enemy in the field.

The same thing holds true, generally speaking, of all traditional
doctrines—those of prudence and knowledge of life, as well as of morals
or religion. All languages and literatures are full of general
observations on life, both as to what it is, and how to conduct oneself
in it; observations which everybody knows, which everybody repeats, or
hears with acquiescence, which are received as truisms, yet of which
most people first truly learn the meaning, when experience, generally of
a painful kind, has made it a reality to them. How often, when smarting
under some unforeseen misfortune or disappointment, does a person call
to mind some proverb or common saying, familiar to him all his life, the
meaning of which, if he had ever before felt it as he does now, would
have saved him from the calamity. There are indeed reasons for this,
other than the absence of discussion: there are many truths of which the
full meaning cannot be realized, until personal experience has brought
it home. But much more of the meaning even of these would have been
understood, and what was understood would have been far more deeply
impressed on the mind, if the man had been accustomed to hear it argued
pro and con by people who did understand it. The fatal tendency of
mankind to leave off thinking about a thing when it is no longer
doubtful, is the cause of half their errors. A cotemporary author has
well spoken of “the deep slumber of a decided opinion.”

But what! (it may be asked) Is the absence of unanimity an indispensable
condition of true knowledge? Is it necessary that some part of mankind
should persist in error, to enable any to realize the truth? Does a
belief cease to be real and vital as soon as it is generally
received—and is a proposition never thoroughly understood and felt
unless some doubt of it remains? As soon as mankind have unanimously
accepted a truth, does the truth perish within them? The highest aim and
best result of improved intelligence, it has hitherto been thought, is
to unite mankind more and more in the acknowledgment of all important
truths: and does the intelligence only last as long as it has not
achieved its object? Do the fruits of conquest perish by the very
completeness of the victory?

I affirm no such thing. As mankind improve, the number of doctrines
which are no longer disputed or doubted will be constantly on the
increase: and the well-being of mankind may almost be measured by the
number and gravity of the truths which have reached the point of being
uncontested. The cessation, on one question after another, of serious
controversy, is one of the necessary incidents of the consolidation of
opinion; a consolidation as salutary in the case of true opinions, as it
is dangerous and noxious when the opinions are erroneous. But though
this gradual narrowing of the bounds of diversity of opinion is
necessary in both senses of the term, being at once Edition: current;
Page: [251] inevitable and indispensable, we are not therefore obliged
to conclude that all its consequences must be beneficial. The loss of so
important an aid to the intelligent and living apprehension of a truth,
as is afforded by the necessity of explaining it to, or defending it
against, opponents, though not sufficient to outweigh, is no trifling
drawback from, the benefit of its universal recognition. Where this
advantage can no longer be had, I confess I should like to see the
teachers of mankind endeavouring to provide a substitute for it; some
contrivance for making the difficulties of the question as present to
the learner’s consciousness, as if they were pressed upon him by a
dissentient champion, eager for his conversion.

But instead of seeking contrivances for this purpose, they have lost
those they formerly had. The Socratic dialectics, so magnificently
exemplified in the dialogues of Plato, were a contrivance of this
description. They were essentially a negative discussion of the great
questions of philosophy and life, directed with consummate skill to the
purpose of convincing any one who had merely adopted the commonplaces of
received opinion, that he did not understand the subject—that he as yet
attached no definite meaning to the doctrines he professed; in order
that, becoming aware of his ignorance, he might be put in the way to
attain a stable belief, resting on a clear apprehension both of the
meaning of doctrines and of their evidence. The school disputations of
the middle ages had a somewhat similar object. They were intended to
make sure that the pupil understood his own opinion, and (by necessary
correlation) the opinion opposed to it, and could enforce the grounds of
the one and confute those of the other. These last-mentioned contests
had indeed the incurable defect, that the premises appealed to were
taken from authority, not from reason; and, as a discipline to the mind,
they were in every respect inferior to the powerful dialectics which
formed the intellects of the “Socratici viri:”[*] but the modern mind
owes far more to both than it is generally willing to admit, and the
present modes of education contain nothing which in the smallest degree
supplies the place either of the one or of the other. A person who
derives all his instruction from teachers or books, even if he escape
the besetting temptation of contenting himself with cram, is under no
compulsion to hear both sides; accordingly it is far from a frequent
accomplishment, even among thinkers, to know both sides; and the weakest
part of what everybody says in defence of his opinion, is what he
intends as a reply to antagonists. It is the fashion of the present time
to disparage negative logic—that which points out weaknesses in theory
or errors in practice, without establishing positive truths. Such
negative criticism would indeed be poor enough as an ultimate result;
but as a means Edition: current; Page: [252] to attaining any positive
knowledge or conviction worthy the name, it cannot be valued too highly;
and until people are again systematically trained to it, there will be
few great thinkers, and a low general average of intellect, in any but
the mathematical and physical departments of speculation. On any other
subject no one’s opinions deserve the name of knowledge, except so far
as he has either had forced upon him by others, or gone through of
himself, the same mental process which would have been required of him
in carrying on an active controversy with opponents. That, therefore,
which when absent, it is so indispensable, but so difficult, to create,
how worse than absurd eit ise to forego, when spontaneously offering
itself! If there are any persons who contest a received opinion, or who
will do so if law or opinion will let them, let us thank them for it,
open our minds to listen to them, and rejoice that there is some one to
do for us what we otherwise ought, if we have any regard for either the
certainty or the vitality of our convictions, to do with much greater
labour for ourselves.

It still remains to speak of one of the principal causes which make
diversity of opinion advantageous, and will continue to do so until
mankind shall have entered a stage of intellectual advancement which at
present seems at an incalculable distance. We have hitherto considered
only two possibilities: that the received opinion may be false, and some
other opinion, consequently, true; or that, the received opinion being
true, a conflict with the opposite error is essential to a clear
apprehension and deep feeling of its truth. But there is a commoner case
than either of these; when the conflicting doctrines, instead of being
one true and the other false, share the truth between them; and the
nonconforming opinion is needed to supply the remainder of the truth, of
which the received doctrine embodies only a part. Popular opinions, on
subjects not palpable to sense, are often true, but seldom or never the
whole truth. They are a part of the truth; sometimes a greater,
sometimes a smaller part, but exaggerated, distorted, and disjoined from
the truths by which they ought to be accompanied and limited. Heretical
opinions, on the other hand, are generally some of these suppressed and
neglected truths, bursting the bonds which kept them down, and either
seeking reconciliation with the truth contained in the common opinion,
or fronting it as enemies, and setting themselves up, with similar
exclusiveness, as the whole truth. The latter case is hitherto the most
frequent, as, in the human mind, one-sidedness has always been the rule,
and many-sidedness the exception. Hence, even in revolutions of opinion,
one part of the truth usually sets while another rises. Even progress,
which ought to superadd, for the most part only substitutes, one partial
and incomplete truth for another; improvement consisting chiefly in
this, that the new fragment of truth is Edition: current; Page: [253]
more wanted, more adapted to the needs of the time, than that which it
displaces. Such being the partial character of prevailing opinions, even
when resting on a true foundation, every opinion which embodies somewhat
of the portion of truth which the common opinion omits, ought to be
considered precious, with whatever amount of error and confusion that
truth may be blended. No sober judge of human affairs will feel bound to
be indignant because those who force on our notice truths which we
should otherwise have overlooked, overlook some of those which we see.
Rather, he will think that so long as popular truth is one-sided, it is
more desirable than otherwise that unpopular truth should have one-sided
asserters too; such being usually the most energetic, and the most
likely to compel reluctant attention to the fragment of wisdom which
they proclaim as if it were the whole.

Thus, in the eighteenth century, when nearly all the instructed, and all
those of the uninstructed who were led by them, were lost in admiration
of what is called civilization, and of the marvels of modern science,
literature, and philosophy, and while greatly overrating the amount of
unlikeness between the men of modern and those of ancient times,
indulged the belief that the whole of the difference was in their own
favour; with what a salutary shock did the paradoxes of Rousseau explode
like bombshells in the midst, dislocating the compact mass of one-sided
opinion, and forcing its elements to recombine in a better form and with
additional ingredients. Not that the current opinions were on the whole
farther from the truth than Rousseau’s were; on the contrary, they were
nearer to it; they contained more of positive truth, and very much less
of error. Nevertheless there lay in Rousseau’s doctrine, and has floated
down the stream of opinion along with it, a considerable amount of
exactly those truths which the popular opinion wanted; and these are the
deposit which was left behind when the flood subsided. The superior
worth of simplicity of life, the enervating and demoralizing effect of
the trammels and hypocrisies of artificial society, are ideas which have
never been entirely absent from cultivated minds since Rousseau wrote;
and they will in time produce their due effect, though at present
needing to be asserted as much as ever, and to be asserted by deeds, for
words, on this subject, have nearly exhausted their power.

In politics, again, it is almost a commonplace, that a party of order or
stability, and a party of progress or reform, are both necessary
elements of a healthy state of political life; until the one or the
other shall have so enlarged its mental grasp as to be a party equally
of order and of progress, knowing and distinguishing what is fit to be
preserved from what ought to be swept away. Each of these modes of
thinking derives its utility from the deficiencies of the other; but it
is in a great measure the opposition of the other that keeps each within
the limits of reason and sanity. Unless opinions Edition: current; Page:
[254] favourable to democracy and to aristocracy, to property and to
equality, to co-operation and to competition, to luxury and to
abstinence, to sociality and individuality, to liberty and discipline,
and all the other standing antagonisms of practical life, are expressed
with equal freedom, and enforced and defended with equal talent and
energy, there is no chance of both elements obtaining their due; one
scale is sure to go up, and the other down. Truth, in the great
practical concerns of life, is so much a question of the reconciling and
combining of opposites, that very few have minds sufficiently capacious
and impartial to make the adjustment with an approach to correctness,
and it has to be made by the rough process of a struggle between
combatants fighting under hostile banners. On any of the great open
questions just enumerated, if either of the two opinions has a better
claim than the other, not merely to be tolerated, but to be encouraged
and countenanced, it is the one which happens at the particular time and
place to be in a minority. That is the opinion which, for the time
being, represents the neglected interests, the side of human well-being
which is in danger of obtaining less than its share. I am aware that
there is not, in this country, any intolerance of differences of opinion
on most of these topics. They are adduced to show, by admitted and
multiplied examples, the universality of the fact, that only through
diversity of opinion is there, in the existing state of human intellect,
a chance of fair play to all sides of the truth. When there are persons
to be found, who form an exception to the apparent unanimity of the
world on any subject, even if the world is in the right, it is always
probable that dissentients have something worth hearing to say for
themselves, and that truth would lose something by their silence.

It may be objected, “But some received principles, especially on the
highest and most vital subjects, are more than half-truths. The
Christian morality, for instance, is the whole truth on that subject,
and if any one teaches a morality which varies from it, he is wholly in
error.” As this is of all cases the most important in practice, none can
be fitter to test the general maxim. But before pronouncing what
Christian morality is or is not, it would be desirable to decide what is
meant by Christian morality. If it means the morality of the New
Testament, I wonder that any one who derives his knowledge of this from
the book itself, can suppose that it was announced, or intended, as a
complete doctrine of morals. The Gospel always refers to a pre-existing
morality, and confines its precepts to the particulars in which that
morality was to be corrected, or superseded by a wider and higher;
expressing itself, moreover, in terms most general, often impossible to
be interpreted literally, and possessing rather the impressiveness of
poetry or eloquence than the precision of legislation. To extract from
it a body of ethical doctrine, has never been possible without eking it
out from the Old Testament, that is, from a system elaborate indeed, but
Edition: current; Page: [255] in many respects barbarous, and intended
only for a barbarous people. St. Paul, a declared enemy to this Judaical
mode of interpreting the doctrine and filling up the scheme of his
Master, equally assumes a pre-existing morality, namely that of the
Greeks and Romans; and his advice to Christians is in a great measure a
system of accommodation to that; even to the extent of giving an
apparent sanction to slavery.[*] What is called Christian, but should
rather be termed theological, morality, was not the work of Christ or
the Apostles, but is of much later origin, having been gradually built
up by the Catholic church of the first five centuries, and though not
implicitly adopted by moderns and Protestants, has been much less
modified by them than might have been expected. For the most part,
indeed, they have contented themselves with cutting off the additions
which had been made to it in the middle ages, each sect supplying the
place by fresh additions, adapted to its own character and tendencies.
That mankind owe a great debt to this morality, and to its early
teachers. I should be the last person to deny; but I do not scruple to
say of it, that it is, in many important points, incomplete and
one-sided, and that unless ideas and feelings, not sanctioned by it, had
contributed to the formation of European life and character, human
affairs would have been in a worse condition than they now are.
Christian morality (so called) has all the characters of a reaction; it
is, in great part, a protest against Paganism. Its ideal is negative
rather than positive; passive rather than active; Innocence rather than
Nobleness; Abstinence from Evil, rather than energetic Pursuit of Good:
in its precepts (as has been well said) “thou shalt not” predominates
unduly over “thou shalt.” In its horror of sensuality, it made an idol
of asceticism, which has been gradually compromised away into one of
legality. It holds out the hope of heaven and the threat of hell, as the
appointed and appropriate motives to a virtuous life: in this falling
far below the best of the ancients, and doing what lies in it to give to
human morality an essentially selfish character, by disconnecting each
man’s feelings of duty from the interests of his fellow-creatures,
except so far as a self-interested inducement is offered to him for
consulting them. It is essentially a doctrine of passive obedience; it
inculcates submission to all authorities found established; who indeed
are not to be actively obeyed when they command what religion forbids,
but who are not to be resisted, far less rebelled against, for any
amount of wrong to ourselves. And while, in the morality of the best
Pagan nations, duty to the State holds even a disproportionate place,
infringing on the just liberty of the individual; in purely Christian
ethics, that grand department of duty is scarcely noticed or
acknowledged. It is in the Koran, not the New Testament, that we read
the maxim—“A ruler who appoints any man to an office, when there is in
his dominions another man better Edition: current; Page: [256] qualified
for it, sins against God and against the State.”[*] What little
recognition the idea of obligation to the public obtains in modern
morality, is derived from Greek and Roman sources, not from Christian;
as, even in the morality of private life, whatever exists of
magnanimity, highmindedness, personal dignity, even the sense of honour,
is derived from the purely human, not the religious part of our
education, and never could have grown out of a standard of ethics in
which the only worth, professedly recognised, is that of obedience.

I am as far as any one from pretending that these defects are
necessarily inherent in the Christian ethics, in every manner in which
it can be conceived, or that the many requisites of a complete moral
doctrine which it does not contain, do not admit of being reconciled
with it. Far less would I insinuate this of the doctrines and precepts
of Christ himself. I believe that the sayings of Christ are all, that I
can see any evidence of their having been intended to be; that they are
irreconcilable with nothing which a comprehensive morality requires;
that everything which is excellent in ethics may be brought within them,
with no greater violence to their language than has been done to it by
all who have attempted to deduce from them any practical system of
conduct whatever. But it is quite consistent with this, to believe that
they contain, and were meant to contain, only a part of the truth; that
many essential elements of the highest morality are among the things
which are not provided for, nor intended to be provided for, in the
recorded deliverances of the Founder of Christianity, and which have
been entirely thrown aside in the system of ethics erected on the basis
of those deliverances by the Christian Church. And this being so, I
think it a great error to persist in attempting to find in the Christian
doctrine that complete rule for our guidance, which its author intended
it to sanction and enforce, but only partially to provide. I believe,
too, that this narrow theory is becoming a grave practical evil,
detracting greatly from the value of the moral training and instruction,
which so many well-meaning persons are now at length exerting themselves
to promote. I much fear that by attempting to form the mind and feelings
on an exclusively religious type, and discarding those secular standards
(as for want of a better name they may be called) which heretofore
co-existed with and supplemented the Christian ethics, receiving some of
its spirit, and infusing into it some of theirs, there will result, and
is even now resulting, a low, abject, servile type of character, which,
submit itself as it may to what it deems the Supreme Will, is incapable
of rising to or sympathizing in the conception of Supreme Goodness. I
believe that other ethics than any which can be evolved from exclusively
Edition: current; Page: [257] Christian sources, must exist side by side
with Christian ethics to produce the moral regeneration of mankind; and
that the Christian system is no exception to the rule, that in an
imperfect state of the human mind, the interests of truth require a
diversity of opinions. It is not necessary that in ceasing to ignore the
moral truths not contained in Christianity, men should ignore any of
those which it does contain. Such prejudice, or oversight, when it
occurs, is altogether an evil; but it is one from which we cannot hope
to be always exempt, and must be regarded as the price paid for an
inestimable good. The exclusive pretension made by a part of the truth
to be the whole, must and ought to be protested against; and if a
reactionary impulse should make the protestors unjust in their turn,
this one-sidedness, like the other, may be lamented, but must be
tolerated. If Christians would teach infidels to be just to
Christianity, they should themselves be just to infidelity. It can do
truth no service to blink the fact, known to all who have the most
ordinary acquaintance with literary history, that a large portion of the
noblest and most valuable moral teaching has been the work, not only of
men who did not know, but of men who knew and rejected, the Christian
faith.

I do not pretend that the most unlimited use of the freedom of
enunciating all possible opinions would put an end to the evils of
religious or philosophical sectarianism. Every truth which men of narrow
capacity are in earnest about, is sure to be asserted, inculcated, and
in many ways even acted on, as if no other truth existed in the world,
or at all events none that could limit or qualify the first. I
acknowledge that the tendency of all opinions to become sectarian is not
cured by the freest discussion, but is often heightened and exacerbated
thereby; the truth which ought to have been, but was not, seen, being
rejected all the more violently because proclaimed by persons regarded
as opponents. But it is not on the impassioned partisan, it is on the
calmer and more disinterested bystander, that this collision of opinions
works its salutary effect. Not the violent conflict between parts of the
truth, but the quiet suppression of half of it, is the formidable evil;
there is always hope when people are forced to listen to both sides; it
is when they attend only to one that errors harden into prejudices, and
truth itself ceases to have the effect of truth, by being exaggerated
into falsehood. And since there are few mental attributes more rare than
that judicial faculty which can sit in intelligent judgment between two
sides of a question, of which only one is represented by an advocate
before it, truth has no chance but in proportion as every side of it,
every opinion which embodies any fraction of the truth, not only finds
advocates, but is so advocated as to be listened to.

We have now recognised the necessity to the mental well-being of mankind
(on which all their other well-being depends) of freedom of opinion,
Edition: current; Page: [258] and freedom of the expression of opinion,
on four distinct grounds; which we will now briefly recapitulate.

First, if any opinion is compelled to silence, that opinion may, for
aught we can certainly know, be true. To deny this is to assume our own
infallibility.

Secondly, though the silenced opinion be an error, it may, and very
commonly does, contain a portion of truth; and since the general or
prevailing opinion on any subject is rarely or never the whole truth, it
is only by the collision of adverse opinions that the remainder of the
truth has any chance of being supplied.

Thirdly, even if the received opinion be not only true, but the whole
truth; unless it is suffered to be, and actually is, vigorously and
earnestly contested, it will, by most of those who receive it, be held
in the manner of a prejudice, with little comprehension or feeling of
its rational grounds. And not only this, but, fourthly, the meaning of
the doctrine itself will be in danger of being lost, or enfeebled, and
deprived of its vital effect on the character and conduct: the dogma
becoming a mere formal profession, inefficacious for good, but cumbering
the ground, and preventing the growth of any real and heartfelt
conviction, from reason or personal experience.

Before quitting the subject of freedom of opinion, it is fit to take
some notice of those who say, that the free expression of all opinions
should be permitted, on condition that the manner be temperate, and do
not pass the bounds of fair discussion. Much might be said on the
impossibility of fixing where these supposed bounds are to be placed;
for if the test be offence to those whose opinion is attacked. I think
experience testifies that this offence is given whenever the attack is
telling and powerful, and that every opponent who pushes them hard, and
whom they find it difficult to answer, appears to them, if he shows any
strong feeling on the subject, an intemperate opponent. But this, though
an important consideration in a practical point of view, merges in a
more fundamental objection. Undoubtedly the manner of asserting an
opinion, even though it be a true one, may be very objectionable, and
may justly incur severe censure. But the principal offences of the kind
are such as it is mostly impossible, unless by accidental self-betrayal,
to bring home to conviction. The gravest of them is, to argue
sophistically, to suppress facts or arguments, to misstate the elements
of the case, or misrepresent the opposite opinion. But all this, even to
the most aggravated degree, is so continually done in perfect good
faith, by persons who are not considered, and in many other respects may
not deserve to be considered, ignorant or incompetent, that it is rarely
possible on adequate grounds conscientiously to stamp the
misrepresentation as morally culpable; and still less could law presume
to interfere with this kind of controversial misconduct. With regard to
what is commonly meant by intemperate discussion, namely invective,
sarcasm, personality, and the like, the Edition: current; Page: [259]
denunciation of these weapons would deserve more sympathy if it were
ever proposed to interdict them equally to both sides; but it is only
desired to restrain the employment of them against the prevailing
opinion: against the unprevailing they may not only be used without
general disapproval, but will be likely to obtain for him who uses them
the praise of honest zeal and righteous indignation. Yet whatever
mischief arises from their use, is greatest when they are employed
against the comparatively defenceless: and whatever unfair advantage can
be derived by any opinion from this mode of asserting it, accrues almost
exclusively to received opinions. The worst offence of this kind which
can be committed by a polemic, is to stigmatize those who hold the
contrary opinion as bad and immoral men. To calumny of this sort, those
who hold any unpopular opinion are peculiarly exposed, because they are
in general few and uninfluential, and nobody but themselves feels much
finterestedf in seeing justice done them: but this weapon is, from the
nature of the case, denied to those who attack a prevailing opinion:
they can neither use it with safety to themselves, nor, if they could,
would it do anything but recoil on their own cause. In general, opinions
contrary to those commonly received can only obtain a hearing by studied
moderation of language, and the most cautious avoidance of unnecessary
offence, from which they hardly ever deviate even in a slight degree
without losing ground: while unmeasured vituperation employed on the
side of the prevailing opinion, really does deter people from professing
contrary opinions, and from listening to those who profess them. For the
interest, therefore, of truth and justice, it is far more important to
restrain this employment of vituperative language than the other: and,
for example, if it were necessary to choose, there would be much more
need to discourage offensive attacks on infidelity, than on religion. It
is, however, obvious that law and authority have no business with
restraining either, while opinion ought, in every instance, to determine
its verdict by the circumstances of the individual case; condemning
every one, on whichever side of the argument he places himself, in whose
mode of advocacy either want of candour, or malignity, bigotry, or
intolerance of feeling manifest themselves; but not inferring these
vices from the side which a person takes, though it be the contrary side
of the question to our own: and giving merited honour to every one,
whatever opinion he may hold, who has calmness to see and honesty to
state what his opponents and their opinions really are, exaggerating
nothing to their discredit, keeping nothing back which tells or can be
supposed to tell, in their favour. This is the real morality of public
discussion: and if often violated. I am happy to think that there are
many controversialists who to a great extent observe it, and a still
greater number who conscientiously strive towards it.

Edition: current; Page: [260]


CHAPTER III: Of Individuality, as One of the Elements of Well-Being

such being the reasons which make it imperative that human beings should
be free to form opinions, and to express their opinions without reserve;
and such the baneful consequences to the intellectual, and through that
to the moral nature of man, unless this liberty is either conceded, or
asserted in spite of prohibition; let us next examine whether the same
reasons do not require that men should be free to act upon their
opinions—to carry these out in their lives, without hindrance, either
physical or moral, from their fellow-men, so long as it is at their own
risk and peril. This last proviso is of course indispensable. No one
pretends that actions should be as free as opinions. On the contrary,
even opinions lose their immunity, when the circumstances in which they
are expressed are such as to constitute their expression a positive
instigation to some mischievous act. An opinion that corn-dealers are
starvers of the poor, or that private property is robbery, ought to be
unmolested when simply circulated through the press, but may justly
incur punishment when delivered orally to an excited mob assembled
before the house of a corn-dealer, or when handed about among the same
mob in the form of a placard. Acts, of whatever kind, which, without
justifiable cause, do harm to others, may be, and in the more important
cases absolutely require to be, controlled by the unfavourable
sentiments, and, when needful, by the active interference of mankind.
The liberty of the individual must be thus far limited; he must not make
himself a nuisance to other people. But if he refrains from molesting
others in what concerns them, and merely acts according to his own
inclination and judgment in things which concern himself, the same
reasons which show that opinion should be free, prove also that he
should be allowed, without molestation, to carry his opinions into
practice at his own cost. That mankind are not infallible; that their
truths, for the most part, are only half-truths; that unity of opinion,
unless resulting from the fullest and freest comparison of opposite
opinions, is not desirable, and diversity not an evil, but a good, until
mankind are much more capable than at present of recognising all sides
of the truth, are principles applicable to men’s modes of action, not
less than to their opinions. As it is useful that while mankind are
imperfect there should be different opinions, so is it that there should
be Edition: current; Page: [261] different experiments of living; that
free scope should be given to varieties of character, short of injury to
others; and that the worth of different modes of life should be proved
practically, when any one thinks fit to try them. It is desirable, in
short, that in things which do not primarily concern others,
individuality should assert itself. Where, not the person’s own
character, but the traditions or customs of other people are the rule of
conduct, there is wanting one of the principal ingredients of human
happiness, and quite the chief ingredient of individual and social
progress.

In maintaining this principle, the greatest difficulty to be encountered
does not lie in the appreciation of means towards an acknowledged end,
but in the indifference of persons in general to the end itself. If it
were felt that the free development of individuality is one of the
leading essentials of well-being; that it is not only a co-ordinate
element with all that is designated by the terms civilization,
instruction, education, culture, but is itself a necessary part and
condition of all those things; there would be no danger that liberty
should be undervalued, and the adjustment of the boundaries between it
and social control would present no extraordinary difficulty. But the
evil is, that individual spontaneity is hardly recognised by the common
modes of thinking, as having any intrinsic worth, or deserving any
regard on its own account. The majority, being satisfied with the ways
of mankind as they now are (for it is they who make them what they are),
cannot comprehend why those ways should not be good enough for
everybody; and what is more, spontaneity forms no part of the ideal of
the majority of moral and social reformers, but is rather looked on with
jealousy, as a troublesome and perhaps rebellious obstruction to the
general acceptance of what these reformers, in their own judgment, think
would be best for mankind. Few persons, out of Germany, even comprehend
the meaning of the doctrine which Wilhelm Von Humboldt, so eminent both
as a savant and as a politician, made the text of a treatise—that “the
end of man, or that which is prescribed by the eternal or immutable
dictates of reason, and not suggested by vague and transient desires, is
the highest and most harmonious development of his powers to a complete
and consistent whole;” that, therefore, the object “towards which every
human being must ceaselessly direct his efforts, and on which especially
those who design to influence their fellow-men must ever keep their
eyes, is the individuality of power and development;” that for this
there are two requisites, “freedom, and avariety of situations;” and
that from the union of these arise “individual vigour and manifold
diversity,” which combine themselves in “originality.”*

Little, however, as people are accustomed to a doctrine like that of Von
Edition: current; Page: [262] Humboldt, and surprising as it may be to
them to find so high a value attached to individuality, the question,
one must nevertheless think, can only be one of degree. No one’s idea of
excellence in conduct is that people should do absolutely nothing but
copy one another. No one would assert that people ought not to put into
their mode of life, and into the conduct of their concerns, any impress
whatever of their own judgment, or of their own individual character. On
the other hand, it would be absurd to pretend that people ought to live
as if nothing whatever had been known in the world before they came into
it; as if experience had as yet done nothing towards showing that one
mode of existence, or of conduct, is preferable to another. Nobody
denies that people should be so taught and trained in youth, as to know
and benefit by the ascertained results of human experience. But it is
the privilege and proper condition of a human being, arrived at the
maturity of his faculties, to use and interpret experience in his own
way. It is for him to find out what part of recorded experience is
properly applicable to his own circumstances and character. The
traditions and customs of other people are, to a certain extent,
evidence of what their experience has taught them; presumptive evidence,
and as such, have a claim to his deference: but, in the first place,
their experience may be too narrow; or they may not have interpreted it
rightly. Secondly, their interpretation of experience may be correct,
but unsuitable to him. Customs are made for customary circumstances, and
customary characters; and his circumstances or his character may be
uncustomary. Thirdly, though the customs be both good as customs, and
suitable to him, yet to conform to custom, merely as custom, does not
educate or develope in him any of the qualities which are the
distinctive endowment of a human being. The human faculties of
perception, judgment, discriminative feeling, mental activity, and even
moral preference, are exercised only in making a choice. He who does
anything because it is the custom, makes no choice. He gains no practice
either in discerning or in desiring what is best. The mental and moral,
like the muscular powers, are improved only by being used. The faculties
are called into no exercise by doing a thing merely because others do
it, no more than by believing a thing only because others believe it. If
the grounds of an opinion are not conclusive to the person’s own reason,
his reason cannot be strengthened, but is likely to be weakened, by his
adopting it: and if the inducements to an act are not such as are
consentaneous to his own feelings and character (where affection, or the
rights of others, are not concerned) it is so much done towards
rendering his feelings and character inert and torpid, instead of active
and energetic.

He who lets the world, or his own portion of it, choose his plan of life
for him, has no need of any other faculty than the ape-like one of
imitation. He who chooses his plan for himself, employs all his
faculties. He Edition: current; Page: [263] must use observation to see,
reasoning and judgment to foresee, activity to gather materials for
decision, discrimination to decide, and when he has decided, firmness
and self-control to hold to his deliberate decision. And these qualities
he requires and exercises exactly in proportion as the part of his
conduct which he determines according to his own judgment and feelings
is a large one. It is possible that he might be guided in some good
path, and kept out of harm’s way, without any of these things. But what
will be his comparative worth as a human being? It really is of
importance, not only what men do, but also what manner of men they are
that do it. Among the works of man, which human life is rightly employed
in perfecting and beautifying, the first in importance surely is man
himself. Supposing it were possible to get houses built corn grown,
battles fought, causes tried, and even churches erected and prayers
said, by machinery—by automatons in human form—it would be a
considerable loss to exchange for these automatons even the men and
women who at present inhabit the more civilized parts of the world, and
who assuredly are but starved specimens of what nature can and will
produce. Human nature is not a machine to be built after a model, and
set to do exactly the work prescribed for it, but a tree, which requires
to grow and develope itself on all sides, according to the tendency of
the inward forces which make it a living thing.

It will probably be conceded that it is desirable people should exercise
their understandings, and that an intelligent following of custom, or
even occasionally an intelligent deviation from custom, is better than a
blind and simply mechanical adhesion to it. To a certain extent it is
admitted, that our understanding should be our own: but there is not the
same willingness to admit that our desires and impulses should be our
own likewise: or that to possess impulses of our own, and of any
strength, is anything but a peril and a snare. Yet desires and impulses
are as much a part of a perfect human being, as beliefs and restraints:
and strong impulses are only perilous when not properly balanced; when
one set of aims and inclinations is developed into strength, while
others, which ought to co-exist with them, remain weak and inactive. It
is not because men’s desires are strong that they act ill; it is because
their consciences are weak. There is no natural connexion between strong
impulses and a weak conscience. The natural connexion is the other way.
To say that one person’s desires and feelings are stronger and more
various than those of another, is merely to say that he has more of the
raw material of human nature, and is therefore capable, perhaps of more
evil, but certainly of more good. Strong impulses are but another name
for energy. Energy may be turned to bad uses; but more good may always
be made of an energetic nature, than of an indolent and impassive one.
Those who have most natural feeling, are always those whose cultivated
feelings may be made the strongest. The same strong susceptibilities
Edition: current; Page: [264] which make the personal impulses vivid and
powerful, are also the source from whence are generated the most
passionate love of virtue, and the sternest self-control. It is through
the cultivation of these, that society both does its duty and protects
its interests: not by rejecting the stuff of which heroes are made,
because it knows not how to make them. A person whose desires and
impulses are his own—are the expression of his own nature, as it has
been developed and modified by his own culture—is said to have a
character. One whose desires and impulses are not his own, has no
character, no more than a steam-engine has a character. If, in addition
to being his own, his impulses are strong, and are under the government
of a strong will, he has an energetic character. Whoever thinks that
individuality of desires and impulses should not be encouraged to unfold
itself, must maintain that society has no need of strong natures—is not
the better for containing many persons who have much character—and that
a high general average of energy is not desirable.

In some early states of society, these forces might be, and were, too
much ahead of the power which society then possessed of disciplining and
controlling them. There has been a time when the element of spontaneity
and individuality was in excess, and the social principle had a hard
struggle with it. The difficulty then was, to induce men of strong
bodies or minds to pay obedience to any rules which required them to
control their impulses. To overcome this difficulty, law and discipline,
like the Popes struggling against the Emperors, asserted a power over
the whole man, claiming to control all his life in order to control his
character—which society had not found any other sufficient means of
binding. But society has now fairly got the better of individuality; and
the danger which threatens human nature is not the excess, but the
deficiency, of personal impulses and preferences. Things are vastly
changed, since the passions of those who were strong by station or by
personal endowment were in a state of habitual rebellion against laws
and ordinances, and required to be rigorously chained up to enable the
persons within their reach to enjoy any particle of security. In our
times, from the highest class of society down to the lowest, every one
lives as under the eye of a hostile and dreaded censorship. Not only in
what concerns others, but in what concerns only themselves, the
individual or the family do not ask themselves—what do I prefer? or,
what would suit my character and disposition? or, what would allow the
best and highest in me to have fair play, and enable it to grow and
thrive? They ask themselves, what is suitable to my position? what is
usually done by persons of my station and pecuniary circumstances? or
(worse still) what is usually done by persons of a station and
circumstances superior to mine? I do not mean that they choose what is
customary, in preference to what suits their own inclination. It does
not occur to them to have any inclination, except Edition: current;
Page: [265] for what is customary. Thus the mind itself is bowed to the
yoke: even in what people do for pleasure, conformity is the first thing
thought of; they like in crowds; they exercise choice only among things
commonly done: peculiarity of taste, eccentricity of conduct, are
shunned equally with crimes: until by dint of not following their own
nature, they have no nature to follow: their human capacities are
withered and starved: they become incapable of any strong wishes or
native pleasures, and are generally without either opinions or feelings
of home growth, or properly their own. Now is this, or is it not, the
desirable condition of human nature?

It is so, on the Calvinistic theory. According to that, the one great
offence of man is bself-willb. All the good of which humanity is
capable, is comprised in cobediencec. You have no choice; thus you must
do, and no otherwise: “whatever is not a duty, is a sin.” Human nature
being radically corrupt, there is no redemption for any one until human
nature is killed within him. To one holding this theory of life,
crushing out any of the human faculties, capacities, and
susceptibilities, is no evil: man needs no capacity, but that of
surrendering himself to the will of God: and if he uses any of his
faculties for any other purpose but to do that supposed will more
effectually, he is better without them. dThisd is the theory of
Calvinism; and it is held, in a mitigated form, by many who do not
consider themselves Calvinists; the mitigation consisting in giving a
less ascetic interpretation to the alleged will of God; asserting it to
be his will that mankind should gratify some of their inclinations; of
course not in the manner they themselves prefer, but in the way of
obedience, that is, in a way prescribed to them by authority; and,
therefore, by the necessary conditions of the case, the same for all.

In some such insidious form there is at present a strong tendency to
this narrow theory of life, and to the pinched and hidebound type of
human character which it patronizes. Many persons, no doubt, sincerely
think that human beings thus cramped and dwarfed, are as their Maker
designed them to be; just as many have thought that trees are a much
finer thing when clipped into pollards, or cut out into figures of
animals, than as nature made them. But if it be any part of religion to
believe that man was made by a good eBeinge, it is more consistent with
that faith to believe, that this Being gave all human faculties that
they might be cultivated and unfolded, not rooted out and consumed, and
that he takes delight in every nearer approach made by his creatures to
the ideal conception embodied in them, every increase in any of their
capabilities of comprehension, of action, or of enjoyment. There is a
different type of human excellence from the Calvinistic; a conception of
humanity as having its nature bestowed on it for other purposes than
merely Edition: current; Page: [266] to be abnegated. “Pagan
self-assertion” is one of the elements of human worth, as well as
“Christian self-denial.”* There is a Greek ideal of self-development,
which the Platonic and Christian ideal of self-government blends with,
but does not supersede. It may be better to be a John Knox than an
Alcibiades, but it is better to be a Pericles than either; nor would a
Pericles, if we had one in these days, be without anything good which
belonged to John Knox.

It is not by wearing down into uniformity all that is individual in
themselves, but by cultivating it and calling it forth, within the
limits imposed by the rights and interests of others, that human beings
become a noble and beautiful object of contemplation; and as the works
partake the character of those who do them, by the same process human
life also becomes rich, diversified, and animating, furnishing more
abundant aliment to high thoughts and elevating feelings, and
strengthening the tie which binds every individual to the race, by
making the race infinitely better worth belonging to. In proportion to
the development of his individuality, each person becomes more valuable
to himself, and is therefore capable of being more valuable to others.
There is a greater fulness of life about his own existence, and when
there is more life in the units there is more in the mass which is
composed of them. As much compression as is necessary to prevent the
stronger specimens of human nature from encroaching on the rights of
others, cannot be dispensed with; but for this there is ample
compensation even in the point of view of human development. The means
of development which the individual loses by being prevented from
gratifying his inclinations to the injury of others, are chiefly
obtained at the expense of the development of other people. And even to
himself there is a full equivalent in the better development of the
social part of his nature, rendered possible by the restraint put upon
the selfish part. To be held to rigid rules of justice for the sake of
others, developes the feelings and capacities which have the good of
others for their object. But to be restrained in things not affecting
their good, by their mere displeasure, developes nothing valuable,
except such force of character as may unfold itself in resisting the
restraint. If acquiesced in, it dulls and blunts the whole nature. To
give any fair play to the nature of each, it is essential that different
persons should be allowed to lead different lives. In proportion as this
latitude has been exercised in any age, has that age been noteworthy to
posterity. Even despotism does not produce its worst effects, so long as
findividualityf exists under it; and whatever crushes individuality is
despotism, by whatever name it may be called, and whether it professes
to be enforcing the will of God or the injunctions of men.

Edition: current; Page: [267]
Having said that Individuality is the same thing with development, and
that it is only the cultivation of individuality which produces, or can
produce, well-developed human beings, I might here close the argument:
for what more or better can be said of any condition of human affairs,
than that it brings human beings themselves nearer to the best thing
they can be? or what worse can be said of any obstruction to good, than
that it prevents this? Doubtless, however, these considerations will not
suffice to convince those who most need convincing; and it is necessary
further to show, that these developed human beings are of some use to
the undeveloped—to point out to those who do not desire liberty, and
would not avail themselves of it, that they may be in some intelligible
manner rewarded for allowing other people to make use of it without
hindrance.

In the first place, then, I would suggest that they might possibly learn
something from them. It will not be denied by anybody, that originality
is a valuable element in human affairs. There is always need of persons
not only to discover new truths, and point out when what were once
truths are true no longer, but also to commence new practices, and set
the example of more enlightened conduct, and better taste and sense in
human life. This cannot well be gainsaid by anybody who does not believe
that the world has already attained perfection in all its ways and
practices. It is true that this benefit is not capable of being rendered
by everybody alike: there are but few persons, in comparison with the
whole of mankind, whose experiments, if adopted by others, would be
likely to be any improvement on established practice. But these few are
the salt of the earth; without them, human life would become a stagnant
pool. Not only is it they who introduce good things which did not before
exist; it is they who keep the life in those which already existed. If
there were nothing new to be done, would human intellect cease to be
necessary? Would it be a reason why those who do the old things should
forget why they are done, and do them like cattle, not like human
beings? There is only too great a tendency in the best beliefs and
practices to degenerate into the mechanical; and unless there were a
succession of persons whose ever-recurring originality prevents the
grounds of those beliefs and practices from becoming merely traditional,
such dead matter would not resist the smallest shock from anything
really alive, and there would be no reason why civilization should not
die out, as in the Byzantine Empire. Persons of genius, it is true, are,
and are always likely to be, a small minority; but in order to have
them, it is necessary to preserve the soil in which they grow. Genius
can only breathe freely in an atmosphere of freedom. Persons of genius
are, ex vi termini, more individual than any other people—less capable,
consequently, of fitting themselves, without hurtful compression, into
any of the small number of moulds which society provides in order to
save its members the trouble of forming their own Edition: current;
Page: [268] character. If from timidity they consent to be forced into
one of these moulds, and to let all that part of themselves which cannot
expand under the pressure remain unexpanded, society will be little the
better for their genius. If they are of a strong character, and break
their fetters, they become a mark for the society which has not
succeeded in reducing them to commonplace, to point at with solemn
warning as “wild,” “erratic,” and the like; much as if one should
complain of the Niagara river for not flowing smoothly between its banks
like a Dutch canal.

I insist thus emphatically on the importance of genius, and the
necessity of allowing it to unfold itself freely both in thought and in
practice, being well aware that no one will deny the position in theory,
but knowing also that almost every one, in reality, is totally
indifferent to it. People think genius a fine thing if it enables a man
to write an exciting poem, or paint a picture. But in its true sense,
that of originality in thought and action, though no one says that it is
not a thing to be admired, nearly all, at heart, think that they can do
very well without it. Unhappily this is too natural to be wondered at.
Originality is the one thing which unoriginal minds cannot feel the use
of. They cannot see what it is to do for them: how should they? If they
could see what it would do for them, it would not be originality. The
first service which originality has to render them, is that of opening
their eyes: which being once fully done, they would have a chance of
being themselves original. Meanwhile, recollecting that nothing was ever
yet done which some one was not the first to do, and that all good
things which exist are the fruits of originality, let them be modest
enough to believe that there is something still left for it to
accomplish, and assure themselves that they are more in need of
originality, the less they are conscious of the want.

In sober truth, whatever homage may be professed, or even paid, to real
or supposed mental superiority, the general tendency of things
throughout the world is to render mediocrity the ascendant power among
mankind. In ancient history, in the middle ages, and in a diminishing
degree through the long transition from feudality to the present time,
the individual was a power in himself; and if he had either great
talents or a high social position, he was a considerable power. At
present individuals are lost in the crowd. In politics it is almost a
triviality to say that public opinion now rules the world. The only
power deserving the name is that of masses, and of governments while
they make themselves the organ of the tendencies and instincts of
masses. This is as true in the moral and social relations of private
life as in public transactions. Those whose opinions go by the name of
public opinion, are not always the same sort of public: in America they
are the whole white population; in England, chiefly the middle class.
But they are always a mass, that is to say, collective mediocrity. And
what is a still greater novelty, the mass do not now take their opinions
from dignitaries in Church or Edition: current; Page: [269] State, from
ostensible leaders, or from books. Their thinking is done for them by
men much like themselves, addressing them or speaking in their name, on
the spur of the moment, through the newspapers. I am not complaining of
all this. I do not assert that anything better is compatible, as a
general rule, with the present low state of the human mind. But that
does not hinder the government of mediocrity from being mediocre
government. No government by a democracy or a numerous aristocracy,
either in its political acts or in the opinions, qualities, and tone of
mind which it fosters, ever did or could rise above mediocrity, except
in so far as the sovereign Many have let themselves be guided (which in
their best times they always have done) by the counsels and influence of
a more highly gifted and instructed One or Few. The initiation of all
wise or noble things, comes and must come from individuals; generally at
first from some one individual. The honour and glory of the average man
is that he is capable of following that initiative; that he can respond
internally to wise and noble things, and be led to them with his eyes
open. I am not countenancing the sort of “hero-worship” which applauds
the strong man of genius for forcibly seizing on the government of the
world and making it do his bidding in spite of itself.[*] All he can
claim is, freedom to point out the way. The power of compelling others
into it, is not only inconsistent with the freedom and development of
all the rest, but corrupting to the strong man himself. It does seem,
however, that when the opinions of masses of merely average men are
everywhere become or becoming the dominant power, the counterpoise and
corrective to that tendency would be, the more and more pronounced
individuality of those who stand on the higher eminences of thought. It
is in these circumstances most especially, that exceptional individuals,
instead of being deterred, should be encouraged in acting differently
from the mass. In other times there was no advantage in their doing so,
unless they acted not only differently, but better. In this age, the
mere example of nonconformity, the mere refusal to bend the knee to
custom, is itself a service. Precisely because the tyranny of opinion is
such as to make eccentricity a reproach, it is desirable, in order to
break through that tyranny, that people should be eccentric.
Eccentricity has always abounded when and where strength of character
has abounded; and the amount of eccentricity in a society has generally
been proportional to the amount of genius, mental vigour, and moral
courage which it contained. That so few now dare to be eccentric, marks
the chief danger of the time.

I have said that it is important to give the freest scope possible to
uncustomary things, in order that it may in time appear which of these
are fit to be converted into customs. But independence of action, and
disregard of Edition: current; Page: [270] custom, are not solely
deserving of encouragement for the chance they afford that better modes
of action, and customs more worthy of general adoption, may be struck
out; nor is it only persons of decided mental superiority who have a
just claim to carry on their lives in their own way. There is no reason
that all human gexistenceg should be constructed on some one or some
small number of patterns. If a person possesses any tolerable amount of
common sense and experience, his own mode of laying out his existence is
the best, not because it is the best in itself, but because it is his
own mode. Human beings are not like sheep; and even sheep are not
undistinguishably alike. A man cannot get a coat or a pair of boots to
fit him, unless they are either made to his measure, or he has a whole
warehouseful to choose from: and is it easier to fit him with a life
than with a coat, or are human beings more like one another in their
whole physical and spiritual conformation than in the shape of their
feet? If it were only that people have diversities of taste, that is
reason enough for not attempting to shape them all after one model. But
different persons also require different conditions for their spiritual
development; and can no more exist healthily in the same moral, than all
the variety of plants can in the same physical, atmosphere and climate.
The same things which are helps to one person towards the cultivation of
his higher nature, are hindrances to another. The same mode of life is a
healthy excitement to one, keeping all his faculties of action and
enjoyment in their best order, while to another it is a distracting
burthen, which suspends or crushes all internal life. Such are the
differences among human beings in their sources of pleasure, their
susceptibilities of pain, and the operation on them of different
physical and moral agencies, that unless there is a corresponding
diversity in their modes of life, they neither obtain their fair share
of happiness, nor grow up to the mental, moral, and aesthetic stature of
which their nature is capable. Why then should tolerance, as far as the
public sentiment is concerned, extend only to tastes and modes of life
which extort acquiescence by the multitude of their adherents? Nowhere
(except in some monastic institutions) is diversity of taste entirely
unrecognised; a person may, without blame, either like or dislike
rowing, or smoking, or music, or athletic exercises, or chess, or cards,
or study, because both those who like each of these things, and those
who dislike them, are too numerous to be put down. But the man, and
still more the woman, who can be accused either of doing “what nobody
does,” or of not doing “what everybody does,” is the subject of as much
depreciatory remark as if he or she had committed some grave moral
delinquency. Persons require to possess a title, or some other badge of
rank, or of the consideration of people of rank, to be able to indulge
somewhat in the luxury of doing as they like without detriment to their
estimation. To indulge somewhat, I repeat: for whoever allow themselves
much Edition: current; Page: [271] of that indulgence, incur the risk of
something worse than disparaging speeches—they are in peril of a
commission de lunatico, and of having their property taken from them and
given to their relations.*

There is one characteristic of the present direction of public opinion,
peculiarly calculated to make it intolerant of any marked demonstration
of individuality. The general average of mankind are not only moderate
in intellect, but also moderate in inclinations: they have no tastes or
wishes strong enough to incline them to do anything unusual, and they
consequently do not understand those who have, and class all such with
the wild and intemperate whom they are accustomed to look down upon.
Now, in addition to this fact which is general, we have only to suppose
that a strong movement has set in towards the improvement of morals, and
it is evident what we have to expect. In these days such a movement has
set in; much has actually been effected in the way of increased
regularity of conduct, and discouragement of excesses; and there is a
philanthropic spirit abroad, for the exercise of which there is no more
inviting field than the moral and prudential improvement of our
fellow-creatures. These tendencies of the times cause the public to be
more disposed than at most former periods to prescribe general rules of
conduct, and endeavour to make every one conform to the approved
standard. And that standard, express or tacit, is to desire nothing
strongly. Its ideal of character is to be without any marked character;
to maim by compression, like a Chinese lady’s foot, every part of
Edition: current; Page: [272] human nature which stands out prominently,
and tends to make the person markedly dissimilar in outline to
commonplace humanity.

As is usually the case with ideals which exclude one-half of what is
desirable, the present standard of approbation produces only an inferior
imitation of the other half. Instead of great energies guided by
vigorous reason, and strong feelings strongly controlled by a
conscientious will, its result is weak feelings and weak energies, which
therefore can be kept in outward conformity to rule without any strength
either of will or of reason. Already energetic characters on any large
scale are becoming merely traditional. There is now scarcely any outlet
for energy in this country except business. The energy expended in
ithisi may still be regarded as considerable. What little is left from
that employment, is expended on some hobby; which may be a useful, even
a philanthropic hobby, but is always some one thing, and generally a
thing of small dimensions. The greatness of England is now all
collective: individually small, we only appear capable of anything great
by our habit of combining; and with this our moral and religious
philanthropists are perfectly contented. But it was men of another stamp
than this that made England what it has been; and men of another stamp
will be needed to prevent its decline.

The despotism of custom is everywhere the standing hindrance to human
advancement, being in unceasing antagonism to that disposition to aim at
something better than customary, which is called, according to
circumstances, the spirit of liberty, or that of progress or
improvement. The spirit of improvement is not always a spirit of
liberty, for it may aim at forcing improvements on an unwilling people;
and the spirit of liberty, in so far as it resists such attempts, may
ally itself locally and temporarily with the opponents of improvement;
but the only unfailing and permanent source of improvement is liberty,
since by it there are as many possible independent centres of
improvement as there are individuals. The progressive principle,
however, in either shape, whether as the love of liberty or of
improvement, is antagonistic to the sway of Custom, involving at least
emancipation from that yoke; and the contest between the two constitutes
the chief interest of the history of mankind. The greater part of the
world has, properly speaking, no history, because the despotism of
Custom is complete. This is the case over the whole East. Custom is
there, in all things, the final appeal; justice and right mean
conformity to custom; the argument of custom no one, unless some tyrant
intoxicated with power, thinks of resisting. And we see the result.
Those nations must once have had originality; they did not start out of
the ground populous, lettered, and versed in many of the arts of life;
they made themselves all this, and were then the greatest and most
powerful nations jofj the Edition: current; Page: [273] world. What are
they now? The subjects or dependents of tribes whose forefathers
wandered in the forests when theirs had magnificent palaces and gorgeous
temples, but over whom custom exercised only a divided rule with liberty
and progress. A people, it appears, may be progressive for a certain
length of time, and then stop: when does it stop? When it ceases to
possess individuality. If a similar change should befall the nations of
Europe, it will not be in exactly the same shape: the despotism of
custom with which these nations are threatened is not precisely
stationariness. It proscribes singularity, but it does not preclude
change, provided all change together. We have discarded the fixed
costumes of our forefathers; every one must still dress like other
people, but the fashion may change once or twice a year. We thus take
care that when there is change it shall be for change’s sake, and not
from any idea of beauty or convenience; for the same idea of beauty or
convenience would not strike all the world at the same moment, and be
simultaneously thrown aside by all at another moment. But we are
progressive as well as changeable: we continually make new inventions in
mechanical things, and keep them until they are again superseded by
better; we are eager for improvement in politics, in education, even in
morals, though in this last our idea of improvement chiefly consists in
persuading or forcing other people to be as good as ourselves. It is not
progress that we object to; on the contrary, we flatter ourselves that
we are the most progressive people who ever lived. It is individuality
that we war against: we should think we had done wonders if we had made
ourselves all alike; forgetting that the unlikeness of one person to
another is generally the first thing which draws the attention of either
to the imperfection of his own type, and the superiority of another, or
the possibility, by combining the advantages of both, of producing
something better than either. We have a warning example in China—a
nation of much talent, and, in some respects, even wisdom, owing to the
rare good fortune of having been provided at an early period with a
particularly good set of customs, the work, in some measure, of men to
whom even the most enlightened European must accord, under certain
limitations, the title of sages and philosophers. They are remarkable,
too, in the excellence of their apparatus for impressing, as far as
possible, the best wisdom they possess upon every mind in the community,
and securing that those who have appropriated most of it shall occupy
the posts of honour and power. Surely the people who did this have
discovered the secret of human progressiveness, and must have kept
themselves steadily at the head of the movement of the world. On the
contrary, they have become stationary—have remained so for thousands of
years; and if they are ever to be farther improved, it must be by
foreigners. They have succeeded beyond all hope in what English
philanthropists are so industriously working at—in making a people all
alike, all governing their thoughts and conduct by the same maxims and
rules; and these are the Edition: current; Page: [274] fruits. The
modern régime of public opinion is, in an unorganized form, what the
Chinese educational and political systems are in an organized; and
unless individuality shall be able successfully to assert itself against
this yoke, Europe, notwithstanding its noble antecedents and its
professed Christianity, will tend to become another China.

What is it that has hitherto preserved Europe from this lot? What has
made the European family of nations an improving, instead of a
stationary portion of mankind? Not any superior excellence in them,
which, when it exists, exists as the effect, not as the cause; but their
remarkable diversity of character and culture. Individuals, classes,
nations, have been extremely unlike one another: they have struck out a
great variety of paths, each leading to something valuable; and although
at every period those who travelled in different paths have been
intolerant of one another, and each would have thought it an excellent
thing if all the rest could have been compelled to travel his road,
their attempts to thwart each other’s development have rarely had any
permanent success, and each has in time endured to receive the good
which the others have offered. Europe is, in my judgment, wholly
indebted to this plurality of paths for its progressive and many-sided
development. But it already begins to possess this benefit in a
considerably less degree. It is decidedly advancing towards the Chinese
ideal of making all people alike. M. de Tocqueville, in his last
important work, remarks how much more the Frenchmen of the present day
resemble one another, than did those even of the last generation.[*] The
same remark might be made of Englishmen in a far greater degree. In a
passage already quoted from Wilhelm von Humboldt,[†] he points out two
things as necessary conditions of human development, because necessary
to render people unlike one another; namely, freedom, and variety of
situations. The second of these two conditions is in this country every
day diminishing. The circumstances which surround different classes and
individuals, and shape their characters, are daily becoming more
assimilated. Formerly, different ranks, different neighbourhoods,
different trades and professions, lived in what might be called
different worlds; at present, to a great degree in the same.
Comparatively speaking, they now read the same things, listen to the
same things, see the same things, go to the same places, have their
hopes and fears directed to the same objects, have the same rights and
liberties, and the same means of asserting them. Great as are the
differences of position which remain, they are nothing to those which
have ceased. And the assimilation is still proceeding. All the political
changes of the age promote it, since they all tend to raise the low and
to lower the high. Every extension of education promotes it, because
education brings people under common influences, and gives them access
to the general stock Edition: current; Page: [275] of facts and
sentiments. Improvements in the means of communication promote it, by
bringing the inhabitants of distant places into personal contact, and
keeping up a rapid flow of changes of residence between one place and
another. The increase of commerce and manufactures promotes it, by
diffusing more widely the advantages of easy circumstances, and opening
all objects of ambition, even the highest, to general competition,
whereby the desire of rising becomes no longer the character of a
particular class, but of all classes. A more powerful agency than even
all these, in bringing about a general similarity among mankind, is the
complete establishment, in this and other free countries, of the
ascendancy of public opinion in the State. As the various social
eminences which enabled persons entrenched on them to disregard the
opinion of the multitude, gradually become levelled; as the very idea of
resisting the will of the public, when it is positively known that they
have a will, disappears more and more from the minds of practical
politicians; there ceases to be any social support for nonconformity—any
substantive power in society, which, itself opposed to the ascendancy of
numbers, is interested in taking under its protection opinions and
tendencies at variance with those of the public.

The combination of all these causes forms so great a mass of influences
hostile to Individuality, that it is not easy to see how it can stand
its ground. It will do so with increasing difficulty, unless the
intelligent part of the public can be made to feel its value—to see that
it is good there should be differences, even though not for the better,
even though, as it may appear to them, some should be for the worse. If
the claims of Individuality are ever to be asserted, the time is now,
while much is still wanting to complete the enforced assimilation. It is
only in the earlier stages that any stand can be successfully made
against the encroachment. The demand that all other people shall
resemble ourselves, grows by what it feeds on. If resistance waits till
life is reduced nearly to one uniform type, all deviations from that
type will come to be considered impious, immoral, even monstrous and
contrary to nature. Mankind speedily become unable to conceive
diversity, when they have been for some time unaccustomed to see it.

Edition: current; Page: [276]


CHAPTER IV: Of the Limits to the Authority of Society over the Individual

what, then, is the rightful limit to the sovereignty of the individual
over himself? Where does the authority of society begin? How much of
human life should be assigned to individuality, and how much to society?

Each will receive its proper share, if each has that which more
particularly concerns it. To individuality should belong the part of
life in which it is chiefly the individual that is interested; to
society, the part which chiefly interests society.

Though society is not founded on a contract, and though no good purpose
is answered by inventing a contract in order to deduce social
obligations from it, every one who receives the protection of society
owes a return for the benefit, and the fact of living in society renders
it indispensable that each should be bound to observe a certain line of
conduct towards the rest. This conduct consists first, in not injuring
the interests of one another; or rather certain interests, which, either
by express legal provision or by tacit understanding, ought to be
considered as rights; and secondly, in each person’s bearing his share
(to be fixed on some equitable principle) of the labours and sacrifices
incurred for defending the society or its members from injury and
molestation. These conditions society is justified in enforcing at all
costs to those who endeavour to withhold fulfilment. Nor is this all
that society may do. The acts of an individual may be hurtful to others,
or wanting in due consideration for their welfare, without going the
length of violating any of their constituted rights. The offender may
then be justly punished by opinion, though not by law. As soon as any
part of a person’s conduct affects prejudicially the interests of
others, society has jurisdiction over it, and the question whether the
general welfare will or will not be promoted by interfering with it,
becomes open to discussion. But there is no room for entertaining any
such question when a person’s conduct affects the interests of no
persons besides himself, or needs not affect them unless they like (all
the persons concerned being of full age, and the ordinary amount of
understanding). In all such cases there should be perfect freedom, legal
and social, to do the action and stand the consequences.

It would be a great misunderstanding of this doctrine to suppose that it
is one of selfish indifference, which pretends that human beings have no
Edition: current; Page: [277] business with each other’s conduct in
life, and that they should not concern themselves about the well-doing
or well-being of one another, unless their own interest is involved.
Instead of any diminution, there is need of a great increase of
disinterested exertion to promote the good of others. But disinterested
benevolence can find other instruments to persuade people to their good,
than whips and scourges, either of the literal or the metaphorical sort.
I am the last person to undervalue the self-regarding virtues; they are
only second in importance, if even second, to the social. It is equally
the business of education to cultivate both. But even education works by
conviction and persuasion as well as by compulsion, and it is by the
former only that, when the period of education is past, the
self-regarding virtues should be inculcated. Human beings owe to each
other help to distinguish the better from the worse, and encouragement
to choose the former and avoid the latter. They should be for ever
stimulating each other to increased exercise of their higher faculties,
and increased direction of their feelings and aims towards wise instead
of foolish, elevating instead of degrading, objects and contemplations.
But neither one person, nor any number of persons, is warranted in
saying to another human creature of ripe years, that he shall not do
with his life for his own benefit what he chooses to do with it. He is
the person most interested in his own well-being; the interest which any
other person, except in cases of strong personal attachment, can have in
it, is trifling, compared with that which he himself has; the interest
which society has in him individually (except as to his conduct to
others) is fractional, and altogether indirect; while, with respect to
his own feelings and circumstances, the most ordinary man or woman has
means of knowledge immeasurably surpassing those that can be possessed
by any one else. The interference of society to overrule his judgment
and purposes in what only regards himself, must be grounded on general
presumptions; which may be altogether wrong, and even if right, are as
likely as not to be misapplied to individual cases, by persons no better
acquainted with the circumstances of such cases than those are who look
at them merely from without. In this department, therefore, of human
affairs. Individuality has its proper field of action. In the conduct of
human beings towards one another, it is necessary that general rules
should for the most part be observed, in order that people may know what
they have to expect; but in each person’s own concerns, his individual
spontaneity is entitled to free exercise. Considerations to aid his
judgment, exhortations to strengthen his will, may be offered to him,
even obtruded on him, by others; but he himself is the final judge. All
errors which he is likely to commit against advice and warning, are far
outweighed by the evil of allowing others to constrain him to what they
deem his good.

I do not mean that the feelings with which a person is regarded by
others, Edition: current; Page: [278] ought not to be in any way
affected by his self-regarding qualities or deficiencies. This is
neither possible nor desirable. If he is eminent in any of the qualities
which conduce to his own good, he is, so far, a proper object of
admiration. He is so much the nearer to the ideal perfection of human
nature. If he is grossly deficient in those qualities, a sentiment the
opposite of admiration will follow. There is a degree of folly, and a
degree of what may be called (though the phrase is not unobjectionable)
lowness or depravation of taste, which, though it cannot justify doing
harm to the person who manifests it, renders him necessarily and
properly a subject of distaste, or, in extreme cases, even of contempt:
a person could not have the opposite qualities in due strength without
entertaining these feelings. Though doing no wrong to any one, a person
may so act as to compel us to judge him, and feel to him, as a fool, or
as a being of an inferior order: and since this judgment and feeling are
a fact which he would prefer to avoid, it is doing him a service to warn
him of it beforehand, as of any other disagreeable consequence to which
he exposes himself. It would be well, indeed, if this good office were
much more freely rendered than the common notions of politeness at
present permit, and if one person could honestly point out to another
that he thinks him in fault, without being considered unmannerly or
presuming. We have a right, also, in various ways, to act upon our
unfavourable opinion of any one, not to the oppression of his
individuality, but in the exercise of ours. We are not bound, for
example, to seek his society; we have a right to avoid it (though not to
parade the avoidance), for we have a right to choose the society most
acceptable to us. We have a right, and it may be our duty, to caution
others against him, if we think his example or conversation likely to
have a pernicious effect on those with whom he associates. We may give
others a preference over him in optional good offices, except those
which tend to his improvement. In these various modes a person may
suffer very severe penalties at the hands of others, for faults which
directly concern only himself; but he suffers these penalties only in so
far as they are the natural, and, as it were, the spontaneous
consequences of the faults themselves, not because they are purposely
inflicted on him for the sake of punishment. A person who shows
rashness, obstinacy, self-conceit—who cannot live within moderate
means—who cannot restrain himself from hurtful indulgences—who pursues
animal pleasures at the expense of those of feeling and intellect—must
expect to be lowered in the opinion of others, and to have a less share
of their favourable sentiments; but of this he has no right to complain,
unless he has merited their favour by special excellence in his social
relations, and has thus established a title to their good offices, which
is not affected by his demerits towards himself.

What I contend for is, that the inconveniences which are strictly
inseparable from the unfavourable judgment of others, are the only ones
Edition: current; Page: [279] to which a person should ever be subjected
for that portion of his conduct and character which concerns his own
good, but which does not affect the interests of others in their
relations with him. Acts injurious to others require a totally different
treatment. Encroachment on their rights; infliction on them of any loss
or damage not justified by his own rights; falsehood or duplicity in
dealing with them; unfair or ungenerous use of advantages over them;
even selfish abstinence from defending them against injury—these are fit
objects of moral reprobation, and, in grave cases, of moral retribution
and punishment. And not only these acts, but the dispositions which lead
to them, are properly immoral, and fit subjects of disapprobation which
may rise to abhorrence. Cruelty of disposition; malice and ill-nature;
that most anti-social and odious of all passions, envy; dissimulation
and insincerity; irascibility on insufficient cause, and resentment
disproportioned to the provocation; the love of domineering over others;
the desire to engross more than one’s share of advantages (the πλεονεξια
of the Greeks); the pride which derives gratification from the abasement
of others; the egotism which thinks self and its concerns more important
than everything else, and decides all doubtful questions in its own
favour:—these are moral vices, and constitute a bad and odious moral
character: unlike the self-regarding faults previously mentioned, which
are not properly immoralities, and to whatever pitch they may be
carried, do not constitute wickedness. They may be proofs of any amount
of folly, or want of personal dignity and self-respect; but they are
only a subject of moral reprobation when they involve a breach of duty
to others, for whose sake the individual is bound to have care for
himself. What are called duties to ourselves are not socially
obligatory, unless circumstances render them at the same time duties to
others. The term duty to oneself, when it means anything more than
prudence, means self-respect or self-development; and for none of these
is any one accountable to his fellow creatures, because for none of them
is it for the good of mankind that he be held accountable to them.

The distinction between the loss of consideration which a person may
rightly incur by defect of prudence or of personal dignity, and the
reprobation which is due to him for an offence against the rights of
others, is not a merely nominal distinction. It makes a vast difference
both in our feelings and in our conduct towards him, whether he
displeases us in things in which we think we have a right to control
him, or in things in which we know that we have not. If he displeases
us, we may express our distaste, and we may stand aloof from a person as
well as from a thing that displeases us; but we shall not therefore feel
called on to make his life uncomfortable. We shall reflect that he
already bears, or will bear, the whole penalty of his error; if he
spoils his life by mismanagement, we shall not, for that reason, desire
to spoil it still further: instead of wishing to punish him, we shall
rather Edition: current; Page: [280] endeavour to alleviate his
punishment, by showing him how he may avoid or cure the evils his
conduct tends to bring upon him. He may be to us an object of pity,
perhaps of dislike, but not of anger or resentment; we shall not treat
him like an enemy of society: the worst we shall think ourselves
justified in doing is leaving him to himself, if we do not interfere
benevolently by showing interest or concern for him. It is far otherwise
if he has infringed the rules necessary for the protection of his
fellow-creatures, individually or collectively. The evil consequences of
his acts do not then fall on himself, but on others; and society, as the
protector of all its members, must retaliate on him; must inflict pain
on him for the express purpose of punishment, and must take care that it
be sufficiently severe. In the one case, he is an offender at our bar,
and we are called on not only to sit in judgment on him, but, in one
shape or another, to execute our own sentence: in the other case, it is
not our part to inflict any suffering on him, except what may
incidentally follow from our using the same liberty in the regulation of
our own affairs, which we allow to him in his.

The distinction here pointed out between the part of a person’s life
which concerns only himself, and that which concerns others, many
persons will refuse to admit. How (it may be asked) can any part of the
conduct of a member of society be a matter of indifference to the other
members? No person is an entirely isolated being; it is impossible for a
person to do anything seriously or permanently hurtful to himself,
without mischief reaching at least to his near connexions, and often far
beyond them. If he injures his property, he does harm to those who
directly or indirectly derived support from it, and usually diminishes,
by a greater or less amount, the general resources of the community. If
he deteriorates his bodily or mental faculties, he not only brings evil
upon all who depended on him for any portion of their happiness, but
disqualifies himself for rendering the services which he owes to his
fellow-creatures generally; perhaps becomes a burthen on their affection
or benevolence; and if such conduct were very frequent, hardly any
offence that is committed would detract more from the general sum of
good. Finally, if by his vices or follies a person does no direct harm
to others, he is nevertheless (it may be said) injurious by his example;
and ought to be compelled to control himself, for the sake of those whom
the sight or knowledge of his conduct might corrupt or mislead.

And even (it will be added) if the consequences of misconduct could be
confined to the vicious or thoughtless individual, ought society to
abandon to their own guidance those who are manifestly unfit for it? If
protection against themselves is confessedly due to children and persons
under age, is not society equally bound to afford it to persons of
mature years who are equally incapable of self-government? If gambling,
or drunkenness, or incontinence, or idleness, or uncleanliness, are as
injurious to happiness, Edition: current; Page: [281] and as great a
hindrance to improvement, as many or most of the acts prohibited by law,
why (it may be asked) should not law, so far as is consistent with
practicability and social convenience, endeavour to repress these also?
And as a supplement to the unavoidable imperfections of law, ought not
opinion at least to organize a powerful police against these vices, and
visit rigidly with social penalties those who are known to practise
them? There is no question here (it may be said) about restricting
individuality, or impeding the trial of new and original experiments in
living. The only things it is sought to prevent are things which have
been tried and condemned from the beginning of the world until now;
things which experience has shown not to be useful or suitable to any
person’s individuality. There must be some length of time and amount of
experience, after which a moral or prudential truth may be regarded as
established: and it is merely desired to prevent generation after
generation from falling over the same precipice which has been fatal to
their predecessors.

I fully admit that the mischief which a person does to himself may
seriously affect, both through their sympathies and their interests,
those nearly connected with him, and in a minor degree, society at
large. When, by conduct of this sort, a person is led to violate a
distinct and assignable obligation to any other person or persons, the
case is taken out of the self-regarding class, and becomes amenable to
moral disapprobation in the proper sense of the term. If, for example, a
man, through intemperance or extravagance, becomes unable to pay his
debts, or, having undertaken the moral responsibility of a family,
becomes from the same cause incapable of supporting or educating them,
he is deservedly reprobated, and might be justly punished: but it is for
the breach of duty to his family or creditors, not for the extravagance.
If the resources which ought to have been devoted to them, had been
diverted from them for the most prudent investment, the moral
culpability would have been the same. George Barnwell murdered his uncle
to get money for his mistress, but if he had done it to set himself up
in business, he would equally have been hanged.[*] Again, in the
frequent case of a man who causes grief to his family by addiction to
bad habits, he deserves reproach for his unkindness or ingratitude; but
so he may for cultivating habits not in themselves vicious, if they are
painful to those with whom he passes his life, or who from personal ties
are dependent on him for their comfort. Whoever fails in the
consideration generally due to the interests and feelings of others, not
being compelled by some more imperative duty, or justified by allowable
self-preference, is a subject of moral disapprobation for that failure,
but not for the cause of it, nor for the errors, merely personal to
himself, which may have remotely led to it. In like Edition: current;
Page: [282] manner, when a person disables himself, by conduct purely
self-regarding, from the performance of some definite duty incumbent on
him to the public, he is guilty of a social offence. No person ought to
be punished simply for being drunk; but a soldier or a policeman should
be punished for being drunk on duty. Whenever, in short, there is a
definite damage, or a definite risk of damage, either to an individual
or to the public, the case is taken out of the province of liberty, and
placed in that of morality or law.

But with regard to the merely contingent, or, as it may be called,
constructive injury which a person causes to society, by conduct which
neither violates any specific duty to the public, nor occasions
perceptible hurt to any assignable individual except himself; the
inconvenience is one which society can afford to bear, for the sake of
the greater good of human freedom. If grown persons are to be punished
for not taking proper care of themselves, I would rather it were for
their own sake, than under pretence of preventing them from impairing
their capacity of rendering to society benefits which society does not
pretend it has a right to exact. But I cannot consent to argue the point
as if society had no means of bringing its weaker members up to its
ordinary standard of rational conduct, except waiting till they do
something irrational, and then punishing them, legally or morally, for
it. Society has had absolute power over them during all the early
portion of their existence: it has had the whole period of childhood and
nonage in which to try whether it could make them capable of rational
conduct in life. The existing generation is master both of the training
and the entire circumstances of the generation to come; it cannot indeed
make them perfectly wise and good, because it is itself so lamentably
deficient in goodness and wisdom; and its best efforts are not always,
in individual cases, its most successful ones; but it is perfectly well
able to make the rising generation, as a whole, as good as, and a little
better than, itself. If society lets any considerable number of its
members grow up mere children, incapable of being acted on by rational
consideration of distant motives, society has itself to blame for the
consequences. Armed not only with all the powers of education, but with
the ascendancy which the authority of a received opinion always
exercises over the minds who are least fitted to judge for themselves;
and aided by the natural penalties which cannot be prevented from
falling on those who incur the distaste or the contempt of those who
know them; let not society pretend that it needs, besides all this, the
power to issue commands and enforce obedience in the personal concerns
of individuals, in which, on all principles of justice and policy, the
decision ought to rest with those who are to abide the consequences. Nor
is there anything which tends more to discredit and frustrate the better
means of influencing conduct, than a resort to the worse. If there be
among those whom it is attempted to coerce into prudence or temperance,
any of the material of which vigorous and independent characters are
made, Edition: current; Page: [283] they will infallibly rebel against
the yoke. No such person will ever feel that others have a right to
control him in his concerns, such as they have to prevent him from
injuring them in theirs; and it easily comes to be considered a mark of
spirit and courage to fly in the face of such usurped authority, and do
with ostentation the exact opposite of what it enjoins; as in the
fashion of grossness which succeeded, in the time of Charles II, to the
fanatical moral intolerance of the Puritans. With respect to what is
said of the necessity of protecting society from the bad example set to
others by the vicious or the self-indulgent; it is true that bad example
may have a pernicious effect, especially the example of doing wrong to
others with impunity to the wrong-doer. But we are now speaking of
conduct which, while it does no wrong to others, is supposed to do great
harm to the agent himself: and I do not see how those who believe this,
can think otherwise than that the example, on the whole, must be more
salutary than hurtful, since, if it displays the misconduct, it displays
also the painful or degrading consequences which, if the conduct is
justly censured, must be supposed to be in all or most cases attendant
on it.

But the strongest of all the arguments against the interference of the
public with purely personal conduct, is that when it does interfere, the
odds are that it interferes wrongly, and in the wrong place. On
questions of social morality, of duty to others, the opinion of the
public, that is, of an overruling majority, though often wrong, is
likely to be still oftener right; because on such questions they are
only required to judge of their own interests; of the manner in which
some mode of conduct, if allowed to be practised, would affect
themselves. But the opinion of a similar majority, imposed as a law on
the minority, on questions of self-regarding conduct, is quite as likely
to be wrong as right; for in these cases public opinion means, at the
best, some people’s opinion of what is good or bad for other people;
while very often it does not even mean that; the public, with the most
perfect indifference, passing over the pleasure or convenience of those
whose conduct they censure, and considering only their own preference.
There are many who consider as an injury to themselves any conduct which
they have a distaste for, and resent it as an outrage to their feelings;
as a religious bigot, when charged with disregarding the religious
feelings of others, has been known to retort that they disregard his
feelings, by persisting in their abominable worship or creed. But there
is no parity between the feeling of a person for his own opinion, and
the feeling of another who is offended at his holding it; no more than
between the desire of a thief to take a purse, and the desire of the
right owner to keep it. And a person’s taste is as much his own peculiar
concern as his opinion or his purse. It is easy for any one to imagine
an ideal public, which leaves the freedom and choice of individuals in
all uncertain matters undisturbed, and only requires them to Edition:
current; Page: [284] abstain from modes of conduct which universal
experience has condemned. But where has there been seen a public which
set any such limit to its censorship? or when does the public trouble
itself about universal experience? In its interferences with personal
conduct it is seldom thinking of anything but the enormity of acting or
feeling differently from itself; and this standard of judgment, thinly
disguised, is held up to mankind as the dictate of religion and
philosophy, by nine-tenths of all moralists and speculative writers.
These teach that things are right because they are right; because we
feel them to be so. They tell us to search in our own minds and hearts
for laws of conduct binding on ourselves and on all others. What can the
poor public do but apply these instructions, and make their own personal
feelings of good and evil, if they are tolerably unanimous in them,
obligatory on all the world?

The evil here pointed out is not one which exists only in theory; and it
may perhaps be expected that I should specify the instances in which the
public of this age and country improperly invests its own preferences
with the character of moral laws. I am not writing an essay on the
aberrations of existing moral feeling. That is too weighty a subject to
be discussed parenthetically, and by way of illustration. Yet examples
are necessary, to show that the principle I maintain is of serious and
practical moment, and that I am not endeavouring to erect a barrier
against imaginary evils. And it is not difficult to show, by abundant
instances, that to extend the bounds of what may be called moral police,
until it encroaches on the most unquestionably legitimate liberty of the
individual, is one of the most universal of all human propensities.

As a first instance, consider the antipathies which men cherish on no
better grounds than that persons whose religious opinions are different
from theirs, do not practise their religious observances, especially
their religious abstinences. To cite a rather trivial example, nothing
in the creed or practice of Christians does more to envenom the hatred
of Mahomedans against them, than the fact of their eating pork. There
are few acts which Christians and Europeans regard with more unaffected
disgust, than Mussulmans regard this particular mode of satisfying
hunger. It is, in the first place, an offence against their religion;
but this circumstance by no means explains either the degree or the kind
of their repugnance; for wine also is forbidden by their religion, and
to partake of it is by all Mussulmans accounted wrong, but not
disgusting. Their aversion to the flesh of the “unclean beast” is, on
the contrary, of that peculiar character, resembling an instinctive
antipathy, which the idea of uncleanness, when once it thoroughly sinks
into the feelings, seems always to excite even in those whose personal
habits are anything but scrupulously cleanly, and of which the sentiment
of religious impurity, so intense in the Hindoos, is a remarkable
example. Suppose now that in a people, of whom the majority were
Mussulmans, that majority Edition: current; Page: [285] should insist
upon not permitting pork to be eaten within the limits of the country.
This would be nothing new in Mahomedan countries.* Would it be a
legitimate exercise of the moral authority of public opinion? and if
not, why not? The practice is really revolting to such a public. They
also sincerely think that it is forbidden and abhorred by the Deity.
Neither could the prohibition be censured as religious persecution. It
might be religious in its origin, but it would not be persecution for
religion, since nobody’s religion makes it a duty to eat pork. The only
tenable ground of condemnation would be, that with the personal tastes
and self-regarding concerns of individuals the public has no business to
interfere.

To come somewhat nearer home: the majority of Spaniards consider it a
gross impiety, offensive in the highest degree to the Supreme Being, to
worship him in any other manner than the Roman Catholic; and no other
public worship is lawful on Spanish soil. The people of all Southern
Europe look upon a married clergy as not only irreligious, but unchaste,
indecent, gross, disgusting. What do Protestants think of these
perfectly sincere feelings, and of the attempt to enforce them against
non-Catholics? Yet, if mankind are justified in interfering with each
other’s liberty in things which do not concern the interests of others,
on what principle is it possible consistently to exclude these cases? or
who can blame people for desiring to suppress what they regard as a
scandal in the sight of God and man? No stronger case can be shown for
prohibiting anything which is regarded as a personal immorality, than is
made out for suppressing these practices in the eyes of those who regard
them as impieties; and unless we are willing to adopt the logic of
persecutors, and to say that we may persecute others because we are
right, and that they must not persecute us because they are wrong, we
must beware of admitting a principle of which we should resent as a
gross injustice the application to ourselves.

The preceding instances may be objected to, although unreasonably, as
drawn from contingencies impossible among us: opinion, in this country,
not being likely to enforce abstinence from meats, or to interfere with
people for worshipping, and for either marrying or not marrying,
according to Edition: current; Page: [286] their creed or inclination.
The next example, however, shall be taken from an interference with
liberty which we have by no means passed all danger of. Wherever the
Puritans have been sufficiently powerful, as in New England, and in
Great Britain at the time of the Commonwealth, they have endeavoured,
with considerable success, to put down all public, and nearly all
private, amusements: especially music, dancing, public games, or other
assemblages for purposes of diversion, and the theatre. There are still
in this country large bodies of persons by whose notions of morality and
religion these recreations are condemned; and those persons belonging
chiefly to the middle class, who are the ascendant power in the present
social and political condition of the kingdom, it is by no means
impossible that persons of these sentiments may at some time or other
command a majority in Parliament. How will the remaining portion of the
community like to have the amusements that shall be permitted to them
regulated by the religious and moral sentiments of the stricter
Calvinists and Methodists? Would they not, with considerable
peremptoriness, desire these intrusively pious members of society to
mind their own business? This is precisely what should be said to every
government and every public, who have the pretension that no person
shall enjoy any pleasure which they think wrong. But if the principle of
the pretension be admitted, no one can reasonably object to its being
acted on in the sense of the majority, or other preponderating power in
the country; and all persons must be ready to conform to the idea of a
Christian commonwealth, as understood by the early settlers in New
England, if a religious profession similar to theirs should ever succeed
in regaining its lost ground, as religions supposed to be declining have
so often been known to do.

To imagine another contingency, perhaps more likely to be realized than
the one last mentioned. There is confessedly a strong tendency in the
modern world towards a democratic constitution of society, accompanied
or not by popular political institutions. It is affirmed that in the
country where this tendency is most completely realized—where both
society and the government are most democratic—the United States—the
feeling of the majority, to whom any appearance of a more showy or
costly style of living than they can hope to rival is disagreeable,
operates as a tolerably effectual sumptuary law, and that in many parts
of the Union it is really difficult for a person possessing a very large
income, to find any mode of spending it, which will not incur popular
disapprobation. Though such statements as these are doubtless much
exaggerated as a representation of existing facts, the state of things
they describe is not only a conceivable and possible, but a probable
result of democratic feeling, combined with the notion that the public
has a right to a veto on the manner in which individuals shall spend
their incomes. We have only further to suppose a considerable diffusion
of Socialist opinions, Edition: current; Page: [287] and it may become
infamous in the eyes of the majority to possess more property than some
very small amount, or any income not earned by manual labour. Opinions
similar in principle to these, already prevail widely among the artizan
class, and weigh oppressively on those who are amenable to the opinion
chiefly of that class, namely, its own members. It is known that the bad
workmen who form the majority of the operatives in many branches of
industry, are decidedly of opinion that bad workmen ought to receive the
same wages as good, and that no one ought to be allowed, through
piecework or otherwise, to earn by superior skill or industry more than
others can without it. And they employ a moral police, which
occasionally becomes a physical one, to deter skilful workmen from
receiving, and employers from giving, a larger remuneration for a more
useful service. If the public have any jurisdiction over private
concerns, I cannot see that these people are in fault, or that any
individual’s particular public can be blamed for asserting the same
authority over his individual conduct, which the general public asserts
over people in general.

But, without dwelling upon supposititious cases, there are, in our own
day, gross usurpations upon the liberty of private life actually
practised, and still greater ones threatened with some expectation of
success, and opinions apropoundeda which assert an unlimited right in
the public not only to prohibit by law everything which it thinks wrong,
but in order to get at what it thinks wrong, to prohibit any number of
things which it admits to be innocent.

Under the name of preventing intemperance, the people of one English
colony, and of nearly half the United States, have been interdicted by
law from making any use whatever of fermented drinks, except for medical
purposes: for prohibition of their sale is in fact, as it is intended to
be, prohibition of their use. And though the impracticability of
executing the law has caused its repeal in several of the States which
had adopted it, including the one from which it derives its name, an
attempt has notwithstanding been commenced, and is prosecuted with
considerable zeal by many of the professed philanthropists, to agitate
for a similar law in this country. The association, or “Alliance” as it
terms itself, which has been formed for this purpose, has acquired some
notoriety through the publicity given to a correspondence between its
Secretary and one of the very few English public men who hold that a
politician’s opinions ought to be founded on principles.[*] Lord
Stanley’s share in this correspondence is calculated to strengthen the
hopes already built on him, by those who know how rare such qualities as
are manifested in some of his public appearances, unhappily Edition:
current; Page: [288] are among those who figure in political life. The
organ of the Alliance, who would “deeply deplore the recognition of any
principle which could be wrested to justify bigotry and persecution,”
undertakes to point out the “broad and impassable barrier” which divides
such principles from those of the association. “All matters relating to
thought, opinion, conscience, appear to me,” he says, “to be without the
sphere of legislation; all pertaining to social act, habit, relation,
subject only to a discretionary power vested in the State itself, and
not in the individual, to be within it.” No mention is made of a third
class, different from either of these, viz. acts and habits which are
not social, but individual; although it is to this class, surely, that
the act of drinking fermented liquors belongs. Selling fermented
liquors, however, is trading, and trading is a social act. But the
infringement complained of is not on the liberty of the seller, but on
that of the buyer and consumer; since the State might just as well
forbid him to drink wine, as purposely make it impossible for him to
obtain it. The Secretary, however, says, “I claim, as a citizen, a right
to legislate whenever my social rights are invaded by the social act of
another.” And now for the definition of these “social rights.” “If
anything invades my social rights, certainly the traffic in strong drink
does. It destroys my primary right of security, by constantly creating
and stimulating social disorder. It invades my right of equality, by
deriving a profit from the creation of a misery I am taxed to support.
It impedes my right to free moral and intellectual development, by
surrounding my path with dangers, and by weakening and demoralizing
society, from which I have a right to claim mutual aid and
intercourse.”[*] A theory of “social rights,” the like of which probably
never before found its way into distinct language: being nothing short
of this—that it is the absolute social right of every individual, that
every other individual shall act in every respect exactly as he ought;
that whosoever fails thereof in the smallest particular, violates my
social right, and entitles me to demand from the legislature the removal
of the grievance. So monstrous a principle is far more dangerous than
any single interference with liberty; there is no violation of liberty
which it would not justify; it acknowledges no right to any freedom
whatever, except perhaps to that of holding opinions in secret, without
ever disclosing them, for, the moment an opinion which I consider
noxious passes any one’s lips, it invades all the “social rights”
attributed to me by the Alliance. The doctrine ascribes to all mankind a
vested interest in each other’s moral, intellectual, and even physical
perfection, to be defined by each claimant according to his own
standard.

Another important example of illegitimate interference with the rightful
liberty of the individual, not simply threatened, but long since carried
into Edition: current; Page: [289] triumphant effect, is Sabbatarian
legislation.[*] Without doubt, abstinence on one day in the week, so far
as the exigencies of life permit, from the usual daily occupation,
though in no respect religiously binding on any except Jews, is a highly
beneficial custom. And inasmuch as this custom cannot be observed
without a general consent to that effect among the industrious classes,
therefore, in so far as some persons by working may impose the same
necessity on others, it may be allowable and right that the law should
guarantee to each the observance by others of the custom, by suspending
the greater operations of industry on a particular day. But this
justification, grounded on the direct interest which others have in each
individual’s observance of the practice, does not apply to the
self-chosen occupations in which a person may think fit to employ his
leisure; nor does it hold good, in the smallest degree, for legal
restrictions on amusements. It is true that the amusement of some is the
day’s work of others; but the pleasure, not to say the useful
recreation, of many, is worth the labour of a few, provided the
occupation is freely chosen, and can be freely resigned. The operatives
are perfectly right in thinking that if all worked on Sunday, seven
days’ work would have to be given for six days’ wages: but so long as
the great mass of employments are suspended, the small number who for
the enjoyment of others must still work, obtain a proportional increase
of earnings; and they are not obliged to follow those occupations, if
they prefer leisure to emolument. If a further remedy is sought, it
might be found in the establishment by custom of a holiday on some other
day of the week for those particular classes of persons. The only
ground, therefore, on which restrictions on Sunday amusements can be
defended, must be that they are religiously wrong; a motive of
legislation which never can be too earnestly protested against. “Deorum
injuriæ Diis curæ.”[†] It remains to be proved that society or any of
its officers holds a commission from on high to avenge any supposed
offence to Omnipotence, which is not also a wrong to our fellow
creatures. The notion that it is one man’s duty that another should be
religious, was the foundation of all the religious persecutions ever
perpetrated, and if admitted, would fully justify them. Though the
feeling which breaks out in the repeated attempts to stop railway
travelling on Sunday, in the resistance to the opening of Museums, and
the like, has not the cruelty of the old persecutors, the state of mind
indicated by it is fundamentally the same. It is a determination not to
tolerate others in doing what is permitted by their religion, because it
is not permitted by the persecutor’s religion. It is a belief that God
not only abominates the act of the misbeliever, but will not hold us
guiltless if we leave him unmolested.

Edition: current; Page: [290]
I cannot refrain from adding to these examples of the little account
commonly made of human liberty, the language of downright persecution
which breaks out from the press of this country, whenever it feels
called on to notice the remarkable phenomenon of Mormonism. Much might
be said on the unexpected and instructive fact, that an alleged new
revelation, and a religion founded on it, the product of palpable
imposture, not even supported by the prestige of extraordinary qualities
in its founder, is believed by hundreds of thousands, and has been made
the foundation of a society, in the age of newspapers, railways, and the
electric telegraph. What here concerns us is, that this religion, like
other and better religions, has its martyrs; that its prophet and
founder[*] was, for his teaching, put to death by a mob; that others of
its adherents lost their lives by the same lawless violence; that they
were forcibly expelled, in a body, from the country in which they first
grew up; while, now that they have been chased into a solitary recess in
the midst of a desert, many in this country openly declare that it would
be right (only that it is not convenient) to send an expedition against
them, and compel them by force to conform to the opinions of other
people. The article of the Mormonite doctrine which is the chief
provocative to the antipathy which thus breaks through the ordinary
restraints of religious tolerance, is its sanction of polygamy; which,
though permitted to Mahomedans, and Hindoos, and Chinese, seems to
excite unquenchable animosity when practised by persons who speak
English, and profess to be a kind of Christians. No one has a deeper
disapprobation than I have of this Mormon institution; both for other
reasons, and because, far from being in any way countenanced by the
principle of liberty, it is a direct infraction of that principle, being
a mere rivetting of the chains of one-half of the community, and an
emancipation of the other from reciprocity of obligation towards them.
Still, it must be remembered that this relation is as much voluntary on
the part of the women concerned in it, and who may be deemed the
sufferers by it, as is the case with any other form of the marriage
institution; and however surprising this fact may appear, it has its
explanation in the common ideas and customs of the world, which teaching
women to think marriage the one thing needful, make it intelligible that
many a woman should prefer being one of several wives, to not being a
wife at all. Other countries are not asked to recognise such unions, or
release any portion of their inhabitants from their own laws on the
score of Mormonite opinions. But when the dissentients have conceded to
the hostile sentiments of others, far more than could justly be
demanded; when they have left the countries to which their doctrines
were unacceptable, and established themselves in a remote corner of the
earth, which they have been the first to render habitable to human
beings; it is difficult to see on what principles but those of tyranny
Edition: current; Page: [291] they can be prevented from living there
under what laws they please, provided they commit no aggression on other
nations, and allow perfect freedom of departure to those who are
dissatisfied with their ways. A recent writer, in some respects of
considerable merit, proposes (to use his own words) not a crusade, but a
civilizade, against this polygamous community, to put an end to what
seems to him a retrograde step in civilization. It also appears so to
me, but I am not aware that any community has a right to force another
to be civilized. So long as the sufferers by the bad law do not invoke
assistance from other communities, I cannot admit that persons entirely
unconnected with them ought to step in and require that a condition of
things with which all who are directly interested appear to be
satisfied, should be put an end to because it is a scandal to persons
some thousands of miles distant, who have no part or concern in it. Let
them send missionaries, if they please, to preach against it; and let
them, by any fair means (of which silencing the teachers is not one,)
oppose the progress of similar doctrines among their own people. If
civilization has got the better of barbarism when barbarism had the
world to itself, it is too much to profess to be afraid lest barbarism,
after having been fairly got under, should revive and conquer
civilization. A civilization that can thus succumb to its vanquished
enemy, must first have become so degenerate, that neither its appointed
priests and teachers, nor anybody else, has the capacity, or will take
the trouble, to stand up for it. If this be so, the sooner such a
civilization receives notice to quit, the better. It can only go on from
bad to worse, until destroyed and regenerated (like the Western Empire)
by energetic barbarians.

Edition: current; Page: [292]


CHAPTER V: Applications

the principles asserted in these pages must be more generally admitted
as the basis for discussion of details, before a consistent application
of them to all the various departments of government and morals can be
attempted with any prospect of advantage. The few observations I propose
to make on questions of detail, are designed to illustrate the
principles, rather than to follow them out to their consequences. I
offer, not so much applications, as specimens of application; which may
serve to bring into greater clearness the meaning and limits of the two
maxims which together form the entire doctrine of this Essay, and to
assist the judgment in holding the balance between them, in the cases
where it appears doubtful which of them is applicable to the case.

The maxims are, first, that the individual is not accountable to society
for his actions, in so far as these concern the interests of no person
but himself. Advice, instruction, persuasion, and avoidance by other
people if thought necessary by them for their own good, are the only
measures by which society can justifiably express its dislike or
disapprobation of his conduct. Secondly, that for such actions as are
prejudicial to the interests of others, the individual is accountable,
and may be subjected either to social or to legal apunishmenta, if
society is of opinion that the one or the other is requisite for its
protection.

In the first place, it must by no means be supposed, because damage, or
probability of damage, to the interests of others, can alone justify the
interference of society, that therefore it always does justify such
interference. In many cases, an individual, in pursuing a legitimate
object, necessarily and therefore legitimately causes pain or loss to
others, or intercepts a good which they had a reasonable hope of
obtaining. Such oppositions of interest between individuals often arise
from bad social institutions, but are unavoidable while those
institutions last; and some would be unavoidable under any institutions.
Whoever succeeds in an overcrowded profession, or in a competitive
examination; whoever is preferred to another in any contest for an
object which both desire, reaps benefit from the loss of others, from
their wasted exertion and their disappointment. But it is, by common
Edition: current; Page: [293] admission, better for the general interest
of mankind, that persons should pursue their objects undeterred by this
sort of consequences. In other words, society admits no right, either
legal or moral, in the disappointed competitors, to immunity from this
kind of suffering; and feels called on to interfere, only when means of
success have been employed which it is contrary to the general interest
to permit—namely, fraud or treachery, and force.

Again, trade is a social act. Whoever undertakes to sell any description
of goods to the public, does what affects the interest of other persons,
and of society in general; and thus his conduct, in principle, comes
within the jurisdiction of society: accordingly, it was once held to be
the duty of governments, in all cases which were considered of
importance, to fix prices, and regulate the processes of manufacture.
But it is now recognised, though not till after a long struggle, that
both the cheapness and the good quality of commodities are most
effectually provided for by leaving the producers and sellers perfectly
free, under the sole check of equal freedom to the buyers for supplying
themselves elsewhere. This is the so-called doctrine of Free Trade,
which rests on grounds different from, though equally solid with, the
principle of individual liberty asserted in this Essay. Restrictions on
trade, or on production for purposes of trade, are indeed restraints;
and all restraint, quâ restraint, is an evil: but the restraints in
question affect only that part of conduct which society is competent to
restrain, and are wrong solely because they do not really produce the
results which it is desired to produce by them. As the principle of
individual liberty is not involved in the doctrine of Free Trade, so
neither is it in most of the questions which arise respecting the limits
of that doctrine; as for example, what amount of public control is
admissible for the prevention of fraud by adulteration; how far sanitary
precautions, or arrangements to protect workpeople employed in dangerous
occupations, should be enforced on employers. Such questions involve
considerations of liberty, only in so far as leaving people to
themselves is always better, cæteris paribus, than controlling them: but
that they may be legitimately controlled for these ends, is in principle
undeniable. On the other hand, there are questions relating to
interference with trade, which are essentially questions of liberty;
such as the Maine Law, already touched upon; the prohibition of the
importation of opium into China; the restriction of the sale of
poisons;[*] all cases, in short, where the object of the interference is
to make it impossible or difficult to obtain a particular commodity.
These interferences are objectionable, not as infringements on the
liberty of the producer or seller, but on that of the buyer.

One of these examples, that of the sale of poisons, opens a new
question; the proper limits of what may be called the functions of
police; how far Edition: current; Page: [294] liberty may legitimately
be invaded for the prevention of crime, or of accident. It is one of the
undisputed functions of government to take precautions against crime
before it has been committed, as well as to detect and punish it
afterwards. The preventive function of government, however, is far more
liable to be abused, to the prejudice of liberty, than the punitory
function; for there is hardly any part of the legitimate freedom of
action of a human being which would not admit of being represented, and
fairly too, as increasing the facilities for some form or other of
delinquency. Nevertheless, if a public authority, or even a private
person, sees any one evidently preparing to commit a crime, they are not
bound to look on inactive until the crime is committed, but may
interfere to prevent it. If poisons were never bought or used for any
purpose except the commission of murder, it would be right to prohibit
their manufacture and sale. They may, however, be wanted not only for
innocent but for useful purposes, and restrictions cannot be imposed in
the one case without operating in the other. Again, it is a proper
office of public authority to guard against accidents. If either a
public officer or any one else saw a person attempting to cross a bridge
which had been ascertained to be unsafe, and there were no time to warn
him of his danger, they might seize him and turn him back, without any
real infringement of his liberty; for liberty consists in doing what one
desires, and he does not desire to fall into the river. Nevertheless,
when there is not a certainty, but only a danger of mischief, no one but
the person himself can judge of the sufficiency of the motive which may
prompt him to incur the risk: in this case, therefore, (unless he is a
child, or delirious, or in some state of excitement or absorption
incompatible with the full use of the reflecting faculty) he ought, I
conceive, to be only warned of the danger; not forcibly prevented from
exposing himself to it. Similar considerations, applied to such a
question as the sale of poisons, may enable us to decide which among the
possible modes of regulation are or are not contrary to principle. Such
a precaution, for example, as that of labelling the drug with some word
expressive of its dangerous character, may be enforced without violation
of liberty: the buyer cannot wish not to know that the thing he
possesses has poisonous qualities. But to require in all cases the
certificate of a medical practitioner, would make it sometimes
impossible, always expensive, to obtain the article for legitimate uses.
The only mode apparent to me, in which difficulties may be thrown in the
way of crime committed through this means, without any infringement,
worth taking into account, upon the liberty of those who desire the
poisonous substance for other purposes, consists in providing what, in
the apt language of Bentham, is called “preappointed evidence.”[*] This
provision is familiar to every one Edition: current; Page: [295] in the
case of contracts. It is usual and right that the law, when a contract
is entered into, should require as the condition of its enforcing
performance, that certain formalities should be observed, such as
signatures, attestation of witnesses, and the like, in order that in
case of subsequent dispute, there may be evidence to prove that the
contract was really entered into, and that there was nothing in the
circumstances to render it legally invalid: the effect being, to throw
great obstacles in the way of fictitious contracts, or contracts made in
circumstances which, if known, would destroy their validity. Precautions
of a similar nature might be enforced in the sale of articles adapted to
be instruments of crime. The seller, for example, might be required to
enter in a register the exact time of the transaction, the name and
address of the buyer, the precise quality and quantity sold; to ask the
purpose for which it was wanted, and record the answer he received. When
there was no medical prescription, the presence of some third person
might be required, to bring home the fact to the purchaser, in case
there should afterwards be reason to believe that the article had been
applied to criminal purposes. Such regulations would in general be no
material impediment to obtaining the article, but a very considerable
one to making an improper use of it without detection.

The right inherent in society, to ward off crimes against itself by
antecedent precautions, suggests the obvious limitations to the maxim,
that purely self-regarding misconduct cannot properly be meddled with in
the way of prevention or punishment. Drunkenness, for example, in
ordinary cases, is not a fit subject for legislative interference; but I
should deem it perfectly legitimate that a person, who had once been
convicted of any act of violence to others under the influence of drink,
should be placed under a special legal restriction, personal to himself;
that if he were afterwards found drunk, he should be liable to a
penalty, and that if when in that state he committed another offence,
the punishment to which he would be liable for that other offence should
be increased in severity. The making himself drunk, in a person whom
drunkenness excites to do harm to others, is a crime against others. So,
again, idleness, except in a person receiving support from the public,
or except when it constitutes a breach of contract, cannot without
tyranny be made a subject of legal punishment; but if, either from
idleness or from any other avoidable cause, a man fails to perform his
legal duties to others, as for instance to support his children, it is
no tyranny to force him to fulfil that obligation, by compulsory labour,
if no other means are available.

Again, there are many acts which, being directly injurious only to the
agents themselves, ought not to be legally interdicted, but which, if
done publicly, are a violation of good manners, and coming thus within
the category of offences against others, may rightfully be prohibited.
Of this kind Edition: current; Page: [296] are offences against decency;
on which it is unnecessary to dwell, the rather as they are only
connected indirectly with our subject, the objection to publicity being
equally strong in the case of many actions not in themselves
condemnable, nor supposed to be so.

There is another question to which an answer must be found, consistent
with the principles which have been laid down. In cases of personal
conduct supposed to be blameable, but which respect for liberty
precludes society from preventing or punishing, because the evil
directly resulting falls wholly on the agent; what the agent is free to
do, ought other persons to be equally free to counsel or instigate? This
question is not free from difficulty. The case of a person who solicits
another to do an act, is not strictly a case of self-regarding conduct.
To give advice or offer inducements to any one, is a social act, and
may, therefore, like actions in general which affect others, be supposed
amenable to social control. But a little reflection corrects the first
impression, by showing that if the case is not strictly within the
definition of individual liberty, yet the reasons on which the principle
of individual liberty is grounded, are applicable to it. If people must
be allowed, in whatever concerns only themselves, to act as seems best
to themselves at their own peril, they must equally be free to consult
with one another about what is fit to be so done; to exchange opinions,
and give and receive suggestions. Whatever it is permitted to do, it
must be permitted to advise to do. The question is doubtful, only when
the instigator derives a personal benefit from his advice; when he makes
it his occupation, for subsistence or pecuniary gain, to promote what
society and the bStateb consider to be an evil. Then, indeed, a new
element of complication is introduced; namely, the existence of classes
of persons with an interest opposed to what is considered as the public
weal, and whose mode of living is grounded on the counteraction of it.
Ought this to be interfered with, or not? Fornication, for example, must
be tolerated, and so must gambling; but should a person be free to be a
pimp, or to keep a gambling-house? The case is one of those which lie on
the exact boundary line between two principles, and it is not at once
apparent to which of the two it properly belongs. There are arguments on
both sides. On the side of toleration it may be said, that the fact of
following anything as an occupation, and living or profiting by the
practice of it, cannot make that criminal which would otherwise be
admissible; that the act should either be consistently permitted or
consistently prohibited; that if the principles which we have hitherto
defended are true, society has no business, as society, to decide
anything to be wrong which concerns only the individual; that it cannot
go beyond dissuasion, and that one person should be as free to persuade,
as another to dissuade. In opposition to this it may be contended, that
although the public, or the State, are Edition: current; Page: [297] not
warranted in authoritatively deciding, for purposes of repression or
punishment, that such or such conduct affecting only the interests of
the individual is good or bad, they are fully justified in assuming, if
they regard it as bad, that its being so or not is at least a disputable
question: That, this being supposed, they cannot be acting wrongly in
endeavouring to exclude the influence of solicitations which are not
disinterested, of instigators who cannot possibly be impartial—who have
a direct personal interest on one side, and that side the one which the
State believes to be wrong, and who confessedly promote it for personal
objects only. There can surely, it may be urged, be nothing lost, no
sacrifice of good, by so ordering matters that persons shall make their
election, either wisely or foolishly, on their own prompting, as free as
possible from the arts of persons who stimulate their inclinations for
interested purposes of their own. Thus (it may be said) though the
statutes respecting unlawful games are utterly indefensible—though all
persons should be free to gamble in their own or each other’s houses, or
in any place of meeting established by their own subscriptions, and open
only to the members and their visitors—yet public gambling-houses should
not be permitted. It is true that the prohibition is never effectual,
and that, whatever amount of tyrannical power cmay bec given to the
police, gambling-houses can always be maintained under other pretences;
but they may be compelled to conduct their operations with a certain
degree of secrecy and mystery, so that nobody knows anything about them
but those who seek them; and more than this, society ought not to aim
at. There is considerable force in these darguments. Id will not venture
to decide whether they are sufficient to justify the moral anomaly of
punishing the accessary, when the principal is (and must be) allowed to
go free; of fining or imprisoning the procurer, but not the fornicator,
the gambling-house keeper, but not the gambler. Still less ought the
common operations of buying and selling to be interfered with on
analogous grounds. Almost every article which is bought and sold may be
used in excess, and the sellers have a pecuniary interest in encouraging
that excess; but no argument can be founded on this, in favour, for
instance, of the Maine Law; because the class of dealers in strong
drinks, though interested in their abuse, are indispensably required for
the sake of their legitimate use. The interest, however, of these
dealers in promoting intemperance is a real evil, and justifies the
State in imposing restrictions and requiring guarantees which, but for
that justification, would be infringements of legitimate liberty.

A further question is, whether the State, while it permits, should
nevertheless indirectly discourage conduct which it deems contrary to
the best interests of the agent; whether, for example, it should take
measures to Edition: current; Page: [298] render the means of
drunkenness more costly, or add to the difficulty of procuring them by
limiting the number of the places of sale. On this as on most other
practical questions, many distinctions require to be made. To tax
stimulants for the sole purpose of making them more difficult to be
obtained, is a measure differing only in degree from their entire
prohibition; and would be justifiable only if that were justifiable.
Every increase of cost is a prohibition, to those whose means do not
come up to the augmented price; and to those who do, it is a penalty
laid on them for gratifying a particular taste. Their choice of
pleasures, and their mode of expending their income, after satisfying
their legal and moral obligations to the State and to individuals, are
their own concern, and must rest with their own judgment. These
considerations may seem at first sight to condemn the selection of
stimulants as special subjects of taxation for purposes of revenue. But
it must be remembered that taxation for fiscal purposes is absolutely
inevitable; that in most countries it is necessary that a considerable
part of that taxation should be indirect; that the State, therefore,
cannot help imposing penalties, which to some persons may be
prohibitory, on the use of some articles of consumption. It is hence the
duty of the State to consider, in the imposition of taxes, what
commodities the consumers can best spare; and à fortiori, to select in
preference those of which it deems the use, beyond a very moderate
quantity, to be positively injurious. Taxation, therefore, of
stimulants, up to the point which produces the largest amount of revenue
(supposing that the State needs all the revenue which it yields) is not
only admissible, but to be approved of.

The question of making the sale of these commodities a more or less
exclusive privilege, must be answered differently, according to the
purposes to which the restriction is intended to be subservient. All
places of public resort require the restraint of a police, and places of
this kind peculiarly, because offences against society are especially
apt to originate there. It is, therefore, fit to confine the power of
selling these commodities (at least for consumption on the spot) to
persons, of known or vouched-for respectability of conduct; to make such
regulations respecting hours of opening and closing as may be requisite
for public surveillance, and to withdraw the licence if breaches of the
peace repeatedly take place through the connivance or incapacity of the
keeper of the house, or if it becomes a rendezvous for concocting and
preparing offences against the law. Any further restriction I do not
conceive to be, in principle, justifiable. The limitation in number, for
instance, of beer and spirit houses, for the express purpose of
rendering them more difficult of access, and diminishing the occasions
of temptation, not only exposes all to an inconvenience because there
are some by whom the facility would be abused, but is suited only to a
state of society in which the labouring classes are avowedly treated as
children or Edition: current; Page: [299] savages, and placed under an
education of restraint, to fit them for future admission to the
privileges of freedom. This is not the principle on which the labouring
classes are professedly governed in any free country; and no person who
sets due value on freedom will give his adhesion to their being so
governed, unless after all efforts have been exhausted to educate them
for freedom and govern them as freemen, and it has been definitively
proved that they can only be governed as children. The bare statement of
the alternative shows the absurdity of supposing that such efforts have
been made in any case which needs be considered here. It is only because
the institutions of this country are a mass of inconsistencies, that
things find admittance into our practice which belong to the system of
despotic, or what is called paternal, government, while the general
freedom of our institutions precludes the exercise of the amount of
control necessary to render the restraint of any real efficacy as a
moral education.

It was pointed out in an early part of this Essay,[*] that the liberty
of the individual, in things wherein the individual is alone concerned,
implies a corresponding liberty in any number of individuals to regulate
by mutual agreement such things as regard them jointly, and regard no
persons but themselves. This question presents no difficulty, so long as
the will of all the persons implicated remains unaltered; but since that
will may change, it is often necessary, even in things in which they
alone are concerned, that they should enter into engagements with one
another; and when they do, it is fit, as a general rule, that those
engagements should be kept. Yet, in the laws, probably, of every
country, this general rule has some exceptions. Not only persons are not
held to engagements which violate the rights of third parties, but it is
sometimes considered a sufficient reason for releasing them from an
engagement, that it is injurious to themselves. In this and most other
civilized countries, for example, an engagement by which a person should
sell himself, or allow himself to be sold, as a slave, would be null and
void; neither enforced by law nor by opinion. The ground for thus
limiting his power of voluntarily disposing of his own lot in life, is
apparent, and is very clearly seen in this extreme case. The reason for
not interfering, unless for the sake of others, with a person’s
voluntary acts, is consideration for his liberty. His voluntary choice
is evidence that what he so chooses is desirable, or at the least
endurable, to him, and his good is on the whole best provided for by
allowing him to take his own means of pursuing it. But by selling
himself for a slave, he abdicates his liberty; he foregoes any future
use of it beyond that single act. He therefore defeats, in his own case,
the very purpose which is the justification of allowing him to dispose
of himself. He is no longer free; but is thenceforth in a position which
has no longer the presumption in its favour, that would be afforded by
his voluntarily Edition: current; Page: [300] remaining in it. The
principle of freedom cannot require that he should be free not to be
free. It is not freedom, to be allowed to alienate his freedom. These
reasons, the force of which is so conspicuous in this peculiar case, are
evidently of far wider application; yet a limit is everywhere set to
them by the necessities of life, which continually require, not indeed
that we should resign our freedom, but that we should consent to this
and the other limitation of it. The principle, however, which demands
uncontrolled freedom of action in all that concerns only the agents
themselves, requires that those who have become bound to one another, in
things which concern no third party, should be able to release one
another from the engagement: and even without such voluntary release,
there are perhaps no contracts or engagements, except those that relate
to money or money’s worth, of which one can venture to say that there
ought to be no liberty whatever of retractation. Baron Wilhelm von
Humboldt, in the excellent essay from which I have already quoted,
states it as his conviction, that engagements which involve personal
relations or services, should never be legally binding beyond a limited
duration of time; and that the most important of these engagements,
marriage, having the peculiarity that its objects are frustrated unless
the feelings of both the parties are in harmony with it, should require
nothing more than the declared will of either party to dissolve it.[*]
This subject is too important, and too complicated, to be discussed in a
parenthesis, and I touch on it only so far as is necessary for purposes
of illustration. If the conciseness and generality of Baron Humboldt’s
dissertation had not obliged him in this instance to content himself
with enunciating his conclusion without discussing the premises, he
would doubtless have recognised that the question cannot be decided on
grounds so simple as those to which he confines himself. When a person,
either by express promise or by conduct, has encouraged another to rely
upon his continuing to act in a certain way—to build expectations and
calculations, and stake any part of his plan of life upon that
supposition—a new series of moral obligations arises on his part towards
that person, which may possibly be overruled, but cannot be ignored. And
again, if the relation between two contracting parties has been followed
by consequences to others; if it has placed third parties in any
peculiar position, or, as in the case of marriage, has even called third
parties into existence, obligations arise on the part of both the
contracting parties towards those third persons, the fulfilment of
which, or at all events the mode of fulfilment, must be greatly affected
by the continuance or disruption of the relation between the original
parties to the contract. It does not follow, nor can I admit, that these
obligations extend to requiring the fulfilment of the contract at all
costs to the happiness of the reluctant party; but they are a necessary
element in the question; and even if, as Von Humboldt Edition: current;
Page: [301] maintains, they ought to make no difference in the legal
freedom of the parties to release themselves from the engagement (and I
also hold that they ought not to make much difference), they necessarily
make a great difference in the moral freedom. A person is bound to take
all these circumstances into account, before resolving on a step which
may affect such important interests of others; and if he does not allow
proper weight to those interests, he is morally responsible for the
wrong. I have made these obvious remarks for the better illustration of
the general principle of liberty, and not because they are at all needed
on the particular question, which, on the contrary, is usually discussed
as if the interest of children was everything, and that of grown persons
nothing.

I have already observed that, owing to the absence of any recognised
general principles, liberty is often granted where it should be
withheld, as well as withheld where it should be granted; and one of the
cases in which, in the modern European world, the sentiment of liberty
is the strongest, is a case where, in my view, it is altogether
misplaced. A person should be free to do as he likes in his own
concerns; but he ought not to be free to do as he likes in acting for
another, under the pretext that the affairs of ethe othere are his own
affairs. The State, while it respects the liberty of each in what
specially regards himself, is bound to maintain a vigilant control over
his exercise of any power which it allows him to possess over others.
This obligation is almost entirely disregarded in the case of the family
relations, a case, in its direct influence on human happiness, more
important than all others taken together. The almost despotic power of
husbands over wives needs not be enlarged upon here, because nothing
more is needed for the complete removal of the evil, than that wives
should have the same rights, and should receive the protection of law in
the same manner, as all other persons; and because, on this subject, the
defenders of established injustice do not avail themselves of the plea
of liberty, but stand forth openly as the champions of power. It is in
the case of children, that misapplied notions of liberty are a real
obstacle to the fulfilment by the State of its duties. One would almost
think that a man’s children were supposed to be literally, and not
metaphorically, a part of himself, so jealous is opinion of the smallest
interference of law with his absolute and exclusive control over them;
more jealous than of almost any interference with his own freedom of
action: so much less do the generality of mankind value liberty than
power. Consider, for example, the case of education. Is it not almost a
self-evident axiom, that the State should require and compel the
education, up to a certain standard, of every human being who is born
its citizen? Yet who is there that is not afraid to recognise and assert
this truth? Hardly any one indeed will deny that it is one of the most
sacred duties of the parents (or, as law and usage now stand, the
Edition: current; Page: [302] father), after summoning a human being
into the world, to give to that being an education fitting him to
perform his part well in life towards others and towards himself. But
while this is unanimously declared to be the father’s duty, scarcely
anybody, in this country, will bear to hear of obliging him to perform
it. Instead of his being required to make any exertion or sacrifice for
securing education to the child, it is left to his choice to accept it
or not when it is provided gratis! It still remains unrecognised, that
to bring a child into existence without a fair prospect of being able,
not only to provide food for its body, but instruction and training for
its mind, is a moral crime, both against the unfortunate offspring and
against society; and that if the parent does not fulfil this obligation,
the State ought to see it fulfilled, at the charge, as far as possible,
of the parent.

Were the duty of enforcing universal education once admitted, there
would be an end to the difficulties about what the State should teach,
and how it should teach, which now convert the subject into a mere
battle-field for sects and parties, causing the time and labour which
should have been spent in educating, to be wasted in quarrelling about
education. If the government would make up its mind to require for every
child a good education, it might save itself the trouble of providing
one. It might leave to parents to obtain the education where and how
they pleased, and content itself with helping to pay the school fees of
the poorer fclassesf of children, and defraying the entire school
expenses of those who have no one else to pay for them. The objections
which are urged with reason against State education, do not apply to the
enforcement of education by the State, but to the State’s taking upon
itself to direct that education: which is a totally different thing.
That the whole or any large part of the education of the people should
be in State hands, I go as far as any one in deprecating. All that has
been said of the importance of individuality of character, and diversity
in opinions and modes of conduct, involves, as of the same unspeakable
importance, diversity of education. A general State education is a mere
contrivance for moulding people to be exactly like one another: and as
the mould in which it casts them is that which pleases the predominant
power in the government, whether this be a monarch, a priesthood, an
aristocracy, or the majority of the existing generation, in proportion
as it is efficient and successful, it establishes a despotism over the
mind, leading by natural tendency to one over the body. An education
established and controlled by the State should only exist, if it exist
at all, as one among many competing experiments, carried on for the
purpose of example and stimulus, to keep the others up to a certain
standard of excellence. Unless, indeed, when society in general is in so
backward a state that it could not or would not provide for itself any
proper institutions of education, unless the government undertook the
task: then, Edition: current; Page: [303] indeed, the government may, as
the less of two great evils, take upon itself the business of schools
and universities, as it may that of joint stock companies, when private
enterprise, in a shape fitted for undertaking great works of industry,
does not exist in the country. But in general, if the country contains a
sufficient number of persons qualified to provide education under
government auspices, the same persons would be able and willing to give
an equally good education on the voluntary principle, under the
assurance of remuneration afforded by a law rendering education
compulsory, combined with State aid to those unable to defray the
expense.

The instrument for enforcing the law could be no other than public
examinations, extending to all children, and beginning at an early age.
An age might be fixed at which every child must be examined, to
ascertain if he (or she) is able to read. If a child proves unable, the
father, unless he has some sufficient ground of excuse, might be
subjected to a moderate fine, to be worked out, if necessary, by his
labour, and the child might be put to school at his expense. Once in
every year the examination should be renewed, with a gradually extending
range of subjects, so as to make the universal acquisition, and what is
more, retention, of a certain minimum of general knowledge, virtually
compulsory. Beyond that minimum, there should be voluntary examinations
on all subjects, at which all who come up to a certain standard of
proficiency might claim a certificate. To prevent the State from
exercising, through these arrangements, an improper influence over
opinion, the knowledge required for passing an examination (beyond the
merely instrumental parts of knowledge, such as languages and their use)
should, even in the higher gclassesg of examinations, be confined to
facts and positive science exclusively. The examinations on religion,
politics, or other disputed topics, should not turn on the truth or
falsehood of opinions, but on the matter of fact that such and such an
opinion is held, on such grounds, by such authors, or schools, or
churches. Under this system, the rising generation would be no worse off
in regard to all disputed truths, than they are at present; they would
be brought up either churchmen or dissenters as they now are, the
hStateh merely taking care that they should be instructed churchmen, or
instructed dissenters. There would be nothing to hinder them from being
taught religion, if their parents chose, at the same schools where they
were taught other things. All attempts by the iStatei to bias the
conclusions of its citizens on disputed subjects, are evil; but it may
very properly offer to ascertain and certify that a person possesses the
knowledge, requisite to make his conclusions, on any given subject,
worth attending to. A student of philosophy would be the better for
being able to stand an examination Edition: current; Page: [304] both in
Locke and in Kant, whichever of the two he takes up with, or even if
with neither: and there is no reasonable objection to examining an
atheist in the evidences of Christianity, provided he is not required to
profess a belief in them. The examinations, however, in the higher
branches of knowledge should, I conceive, be entirely voluntary. It
would be giving too dangerous a power to governments, were they allowed
to exclude any one from professions, even from the profession of
teacher, for alleged deficiency of qualifications: and I think, with
Wilhelm von Humboldt,[*] that degrees, or other public certificates of
scientific or professional acquirements, should be given to all who
present themselves for examination, and stand the test; but that such
certificates should confer no advantage over competitors, other than the
weight which may be attached to their testimony by public opinion.

It is not in the matter of education only, that misplaced notions of
liberty prevent moral obligations on the part of parents from being
recognised, and legal obligations from being imposed, where there are
the strongest grounds for the former always, and in many cases for the
latter also. The fact itself, of causing the existence of a human being,
is one of the most responsible actions in the range of human life. To
undertake this responsibility—to bestow a life which may be either a
curse or a blessing—unless the being on whom it is to be bestowed will
have at least the ordinary chances of a desirable existence, is a crime
against that being. And in a country either overpeopled, or threatened
with being so, to produce children, beyond a very small number, with the
effect of reducing the reward of labour by their competition, is a
serious offence against all who live by the remuneration of their
labour. The laws which, in many countries on the Continent, forbid
marriage unless the parties can show that they have the means of
supporting a family, do not exceed the legitimate powers of the jStatej:
and whether such laws be expedient or not (a question mainly dependent
on local circumstances and feelings), they are not objectionable as
violations of liberty. Such laws are interferences of the kStatek to
prohibit a mischievous act—an act injurious to others, which ought to be
a subject of reprobation, and social stigma, even when it is not deemed
expedient to superadd legal punishment. Yet the current ideas of
liberty, which bend so easily to real infringements of the freedom of
the individual in things which concern only himself, would repel the
attempt to put any restraint upon his inclinations when the consequence
of their indulgence is a life or lives of wretchedness and depravity to
the offspring, with manifold evils to those sufficiently within reach to
be in any way affected by their actions. When we compare the strange
respect of mankind for liberty, with their strange want of respect for
it, we might imagine that a Edition: current; Page: [305] man had an
indispensable right to do harm to others, and no right at all to please
himself without giving pain to any one.

I have reserved for the last place a large class of questions respecting
the limits of government interference, which, though closely connected
with the subject of this Essay, do not, in strictness, belong to it.
These are cases in which the reasons against interference do not turn
upon the principle of liberty: the question is not about restraining the
actions of individuals, but about helping them: it is asked whether the
government should do, or cause to be done, something for their benefit,
instead of leaving it to be done by themselves, individually, or in
voluntary combination.

The objections to government interference, when it is not such as to
involve infringement of liberty, may be of three kinds.

The first is, when the thing to be done is likely to be better done by
individuals than by the government. Speaking generally, there is no one
so fit to conduct any business, or to determine how or by whom it shall
be conducted, as those who are personally interested in it. This
principle condemns the interferences, once so common, of the
legislature, or the officers of government, with the ordinary processes
of industry. But this part of the subject has been sufficiently enlarged
upon by political economists, and is not particularly related to the
principles of this Essay.

The second objection is more nearly allied to our subject. In many
cases, though individuals may not do the particular thing so well, on
the average, as the officers of government, it is nevertheless desirable
that it should be done by them, rather than by the government, as a
means to their own mental education—a mode of strengthening their active
faculties, exercising their judgment, and giving them a familiar
knowledge of the subjects with which they are thus left to deal. This is
a principal, though not the sole, recommendation of jury trial (in cases
not political); of free and popular local and municipal institutions; of
the conduct of industrial and philanthropic enterprises by voluntary
associations. These are not questions of liberty, and are connected with
that subject only by remote tendencies; but they are questions of
development. It belongs to a different occasion from the present to
dwell on these things as parts of national education; as being, in
truth, the peculiar training of a citizen, the practical part of the
political education of a free people, taking them out of the narrow
circle of personal and family selfishness, and accustoming them to the
comprehension of joint interests, the management of joint
concerns—habituating them to act from public or semi-public motives, and
guide their conduct by aims which unite instead of isolating them from
one another. Without these habits and powers, a free constitution can
neither be worked nor preserved; as is exemplified by the too-often
transitory nature of political freedom in countries where it does not
rest upon a sufficient basis of local liberties. The management of
purely Edition: current; Page: [306] local business by the localities,
and of the great enterprises of industry by the union of those who
voluntarily supply the pecuniary means, is further recommended by all
the advantages which have been set forth in this Essay as belonging to
individuality of development, and diversity of modes of action.
Government operations tend to be everywhere alike. With individuals and
voluntary associations, on the contrary, there are varied experiments,
and endless diversity of experience. What the State can usefully do, is
to make itself a central depository, and active circulator and diffuser,
of the experience resulting from many trials. Its business is to enable
each experimentalist to benefit by the experiments of others; instead of
tolerating no experiments but its own.

The third, and most cogent reason for restricting the interference of
government, is the great evil of adding unnecessarily to its power.
Every function superadded to those already exercised by the government,
causes its influence over hopes and fears to be more widely diffused,
and converts, more and more, the active and ambitious part of the public
into hangers-on of the government, or of some party which aims at
becoming the government. If the roads, the railways, the banks, the
insurance offices, the great joint-stock companies, the universities,
and the public charities, were all of them branches of the government:
if, in addition, the municipal corporations and local boards, with all
that now devolves on them, became departments of the central
administration; if the employés of all these different enterprises were
appointed and paid by the government, and looked to the government for
every rise in life; not all the freedom of the press and popular
constitution of the legislature would make this or any other country
free otherwise than in name. And the evil would be greater, the more
efficiently and scientifically the administrative machinery was
constructed—the more skilful the arrangements for obtaining the best
qualified hands and heads with which to work it. In England it has of
late been proposed that all the members of the civil service of
government should be selected by competitive examination, to obtain for
those employments the most intelligent and instructed persons
procurable; and much has been said and written for and against this
proposal.[*] One of the arguments most insisted on by its opponents, is
that the occupation of a permanent official servant of the State does
not hold out sufficient prospects of emolument and importance to attract
the highest talents, which will always be able to find a more inviting
career in the professions, or in the service of companies and other
public bodies. One would not have been surprised if this argument had
been used by the friends of the proposition, as an answer to its
principal difficulty. Coming from the opponents it is strange enough.
What is urged as an objection is the safety-valve of the proposed
system. If indeed all the high talent of the country could be Edition:
current; Page: [307] drawn into the service of the government, a
proposal tending to bring about that result might well inspire
uneasiness. If every part of the business of society which required
organized concert, or large and comprehensive views, were in the hands
of the government, and if government offices were universally filled by
the ablest men, all the enlarged culture and practised intelligence in
the country, except the purely speculative, would be concentrated in a
numerous bureaucracy, to whom alone the rest of the community would look
for all things: the multitude for direction and dictation in all they
had to do; the able and aspiring for personal advancement. To be
admitted into the ranks of this bureaucracy, and when admitted, to rise
therein, would be the sole objects of ambition. Under this régime, not
only is the outside public ill-qualified, for want of practical
experience, to criticize or check the mode of operation of the
bureaucracy, but even if the accidents of despotic or the natural
working of popular institutions occasionally raise to the summit a ruler
or rulers of reforming inclinations, no reform can be effected which is
contrary to the interest of the bureaucracy. Such is the melancholy
condition of the Russian empire, asl shown in the accounts of those who
have had sufficient opportunity of observation. The Czar himself is
powerless against the bureaucratic body; he can send any one of them to
Siberia, but he cannot govern without them, or against their will. On
every decree of his they have a tacit veto, by merely refraining from
carrying it into effect. In countries of more advanced civilization and
of a more insurrectionary spirit, the public, accustomed to expect
everything to be done for them by the State, or at least to do nothing
for themselves without asking from the State not only leave to do it,
but even how it is to be done, naturally hold the State responsible for
all evil which befals them, and when the evil exceeds their amount of
patience, they rise against the government and make what is called a
revolution; whereupon somebody else, with or without legitimate
authority from the nation, vaults into the seat, issues his orders to
the bureaucracy, and everything goes on much as it did before; the
bureaucracy being unchanged, and nobody else being capable of taking
their place.

A very different spectacle is exhibited among a people accustomed to
transact their own business. In France, a large part of the people
having been engaged in military service, many of whom have held at least
the rank of non-commissioned officers, there are in every popular
insurrection several persons competent to take the lead, and improvise
some tolerable plan of action. What the French are in military affairs,
the Americans are in every kind of civil business; let them be left
without a government, every body of Americans is able to improvise one,
and to carry on that or any other public business with a sufficient
amount of intelligence, order, and decision. This is what every free
people ought to be: and a people capable of this is certain to Edition:
current; Page: [308] be free; it will never let itself be enslaved by
any man or body of men because these are able to seize and pull the
reins of the central administration. No bureaucracy can hope to make
such a people as this do or undergo anything that they do not like. But
where everything is done through the bureaucracy, nothing to which the
bureaucracy is really adverse can be done at all. The constitution of
such countries is an organization of the experience and practical
ability of the nation, into a disciplined body for the purpose of
governing the rest; and the more perfect that organization is in itself,
the more successful in drawing to itself and educating for itself the
persons of greatest capacity from all ranks of the community, the more
complete is the bondage of all, the members of the bureaucracy included.
For the governors are as much the slaves of their organization and
discipline, as the governed are of the governors. A Chinese mandarin is
as much the tool and creature of a despotism as the humblest cultivator.
An individual Jesuit is to the utmost degree of abasement the slave of
his order, though the order itself exists for the collective power and
importance of its members.

It is not, also, to be forgotten, that the absorption of all the
principal ability of the country into the governing body is fatal,
sooner or later, to the mental activity and progressiveness of the body
itself. Banded together as they are—working a system which, like all
systems, necessarily proceeds in a great measure by fixed rules—the
official body are under the constant temptation of sinking into indolent
routine, or, if they now and then desert that mill-horse round, of
rushing into some half-examined crudity which has struck the fancy of
some leading member of the corps: and the sole check to these closely
allied, though seemingly opposite, tendencies, the only stimulus which
can keep the ability of the body itself up to a high standard, is
liability to the watchful criticism of equal ability outside the body.
It is indispensable, therefore, that the means should exist,
independently of the government, of forming such ability, and furnishing
it with the opportunities and experience necessary for a correct
judgment of great practical affairs. If we would possess permanently a
skilful and efficient body of functionaries—above all, a body able to
originate and willing to adopt improvements; if we would not have our
bureaucracy degenerate into a pedantocracy, this body must not engross
all the occupations which form and cultivate the faculties required for
the government of mankind.

To determine the point at which evils, so formidable to human freedom
and advancement, begin, or rather at which they begin to predominate
over the benefits attending the collective application of the force of
society, under its recognised chiefs, for the removal of the obstacles
which stand in the way of its well-being; to secure as much of the
advantages of centralized power and intelligence, as can be had without
turning into governmental channels too great a proportion of the general
activity—is one of the most Edition: current; Page: [309] difficult and
complicated questions in the art of government. It is, in a great
measure, a question of detail, in which many and various considerations
must be kept in view, and no absolute rule can be laid down. But I
believe that the practical principle in which safety resides, the ideal
to be kept in view, the standard by which to test all arrangements
intended for overcoming the difficulty, may be conveyed in these words:
the greatest dissemination of power consistent with efficiency; but the
greatest possible centralization of information, and diffusion of it
from the centre. Thus, in municipal administration, there would be, as
in the New England States, a very minute division among separate
officers, chosen by the localities, of all business which is not better
left to the persons directly interested; but besides this, there would
be, in each department of local affairs, a central superintendence,
forming a branch of the general government. The organ of this
superintendence would concentrate, as in a focus, the variety of
information and experience derived from the conduct of that branch of
public business in all the localities, from everything analogous which
is done in foreign countries, and from the general principles of
political science. This central organ should have a right to know all
that is done, and its special duty should be that of making the
knowledge acquired in one place available for others. Emancipated from
the petty prejudices and narrow views of a locality by its elevated
position and comprehensive sphere of observation, its advice would
naturally carry much authority; but its actual power, as a permanent
institution, should, I conceive, be limited to compelling the local
officers to obey the laws laid down for their guidance. In all things
not provided for by general rules, those officers should be left to
their own judgment, under responsibility to their constituents. For the
violation of rules, they should be responsible to law, and the rules
themselves should be laid down by the legislature; the central
administrative authority only watching over their execution, and if they
were not properly carried into effect, appealing, according to the
nature of the case, to the mtribunalsm to enforce the law, or to the
constituencies to dismiss the functionaries who had not executed it
according to its spirit. Such, in its general conception, is the central
superintendence which the Poor Law Board is intended to exercise over
the administrators of the Poor Rate throughout the country. Whatever
powers the Board exercises beyond this limit, were right and necessary
in that peculiar case, for the cure of rooted habits of
maladministration in matters deeply affecting not the localities merely,
but the whole community; since no locality has a moral right to make
itself by mismanagement a nest of pauperism, necessarily overflowing
into other localities, and impairing the moral and physical condition of
the whole labouring community. The powers of administrative coercion and
subordinate legislation possessed by the Edition: current; Page: [310]
Poor Law Board (but which, owing to the state of opinion on the subject,
are very scantily exercised by them), though perfectly justifiable in a
case of first-rate national interest, would be wholly out of place in
the superintendence of interests purely local. But a central organ of
information and instruction for all the localities, would be equally
valuable in all departments of administration. A government cannot have
too much of the kind of activity which does not impede, but aids and
stimulates, individual exertion and development. The mischief begins
when, instead of calling forth the activity and powers of individuals
and bodies, it substitutes its own activity for theirs; when, instead of
informing, advising, and, upon occasion, denouncing, it makes them work
in fetters, or bids them stand aside and does their work instead of
them. The worth of a State, in the long run, is the worth of the
individuals composing it; and a State which postpones the interests of
their mental expansion and elevation, to a little more of administrative
skill, or of that semblance of it which practice gives, in the details
of business; a State which dwarfs its men, in order that they may be
more docile instruments in its hands even for beneficial purposes—will
find that with small men no great thing can really be accomplished; and
that the perfection of machinery to which it has sacrificed everything,
will in the end avail it nothing, for want of the vital power which, in
order that the machine might work more smoothly, it has preferred to
banish.

1
Autobiography, ed. Jack Stillinger (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1969), 42.

2
Ibid., 52-3.

3
See for his characteristic ideas at the time: “The Game Laws,”
Westminster Review, V (Jan., 1826), 1-22: “Law of Libel and Liberty of
the Press,” Westminster Review, III (April, 1825), 285-381.

4
Joseph Hamburger in James Mill and the Art of Revolution (New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1963), 27-33, discusses James Mill’s ideas on the
necessity of a free press to effect reform.

5
A. W. Levi, “The Mental Crisis of John Stuart Mill,” The Psychoanalytic
Review, XXXII (1946), 84-101.

6
See his long letter to John Sterling, 20-22 October, 1831, in Earlier
Letters, ed. F. E. Mineka, Collected Works, XII (Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 1963), 74-88 (hereafter cited as EL, CW, with volume and
page numbers).

7
See Textual Introduction, System of Logic, CW, VII, liv-lv.

8
Autobiography, 97.

9
EL, CW, XII, 74-88.

10
Ibid., 84.

11
Later Letters, ed. F. E. Mineka and D. N. Lindley (Toronto: University
of Toronto Press, 1972), XIV, 68 (hereafter cited as LL, CW, with volume
and page numbers).

12
EL, CW, XIII, 380. Much information on this theme is contained in Joseph
Hamburger, Intellectual in Politics John Stuart Mill and the Philosophic
Radicals (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1965).

13
EL, CW, XII, 32.

14
See letters to his father from Paris, ibid., 54-67.

15
Iris W. Mueller examines the content of these articles in John Stuart
Mill and French Thought (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1956),
Chapter ii.

16
Three other notable writings of this decade, not included in the present
volume, also shed illuminating light on his political ideas: “The Spirit
of the Age” (1831), “Bentham” (1838), and “Coleridge” (1840).

17
EL, CW, XII, 205.

18
See J. S. Mill, “The House of Lords,” Globe, 16 October, 1836, 2; and
“The Close of the Session,” London Review, II (October, 1835), 271-2.

19
Examiner, 1 July, 1832, 417. See also a similar argument two years
earlier in “Prospects of France,” Examiner, 10 October, 1830, 642.

20
De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [II],” 156. See also Mill’s
laudatory remarks in a letter to the author after he had read the second
part, EL, CW, XIII, 433-5 (referred to in the Textual Introduction,
lxxvi-lxxvii below).

21
“De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [I],” 76-7. In 1840 he told
Macvey Napier that he did not differ strongly from Tocqueville on this
issue (EL, CW, XIII, 444).

22
Autobiography, 115-16.

23
Letter to Gustave d’Eichthal, EL, CW, XII, 37 (8/10/29).

24
EL, CW, XIII, 713.

25
Alexander Bain, John Stuart Mill A Criticism with Personal Recollections
(London: Longmans, 1882), 48.

26
In 1859 Mill added a footnote to his original article admitting that his
criticisms were now less justified because of recent university reforms.

27
EL, CW, XII, 27.

28
LL, CW, XIV, 175.

29
See Edward Hughes. “Sir Charles Trevelyan and Civil Service Reform
1853-55.” English Historical Review, LXIV (1949), 64 A comprehensive and
lucid review of the controversy concerning the Northcote-Trevelyan
Report is contained in J. B. Conachet. The Aberdeen Coalition, 1852-1855
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1968), 312-32.

30
LL, CW, XV, 598-9.

31
Ibid., 596.

32
Ibid., 606.

33
EL, CW, XII, 317.

34
EL, CW, XIII, 410.

35
See H. J. Hanham, Elections and Party Management Politics in the Time of
Disraeli and Gladstone (London: Longmans, 1959); Charles Seymour,
Electoral Reform in England and Wales: The Development and Operation of
the Parliamentary Franchise, 1832-1885 (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1915), 432. In Ireland the ballot had its greatest effect,
because intimidation was more common there.

36
Quoted from the Chadwick Papers by Hamburger, Intellectuals in Politics,
274.

37
LL, CW, XV, 654.

38
Ibid., 672.

39
Though On Liberty was written and published before Considerations on
Representative Government, the latter is here discussed first, because
it provides a fuller treatment of the views of Mill just outlined.

40
For an argument that Bagehot was heavily indebted to Mill, see T. H.
Ford, “Bagehot and Mill as Theorists of Comparative Politics,”
Comparative Politics, II (January, 1970), 309-24. A. H. Birch lauds
Considerations on Representative Government as “the most systematic
attempt ever made in Britain to set out a theory of the purpose and
proper organization of representative institutions” (Representative and
Responsible Government [Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1964],
57).

41
Autobiography, 102.

42
P. 467. In the year after publishing Considerations on Representative
Government Mill wrote to Henry S. Chapman that Australian democracy, as
described by Chapman, confirmed his fears about false democracy (LL, CW,
XV, 764-5). See also R. S. Neale, “John Stuart Mill on Australia: A
Note,” Historical Studies Australia and New Zealand, XIII (April, 1968),
242-4.

43
LL, CW, XVII, 1572.

44
EL, CW, XII, 211. See also LL, CW, XVI, 1431-2. For an account of the
abilities and weaknesses of this exceptional man, see S. F. Finer. The
Life and Times of Sir Edwin Chadwick (London: Methuen, 1952).

45
Harold J. Laski, et al., A Century of Municipal Progress, 1835-1935
(London: Allen and Unwin, 1935), 48.

46
Hansard’s Parliamentary Debates. 3rd ser., CXCI, cols. 1859-63 (5 May,
1868). See also LL, CW, XVI, 1501-2, and XVII, 1555-6.

47
Josef Redlich and Francis Hirst. Local Government in England (London:
Macmillan, 1903), I, 180.

48
“Coleridge,” Collected Works, X (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1969), 135-6, 504-8 (henceforth cited as CW, X): and A System of Logic,
Collected Works, VIII (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1973), 923
(henceforth cited as CW, VII or VIII as appropriate).

49
See a criticism of Mill’s view in Boyd C. Shafer, Nationalism: Myth and
Reality (New York: Harcourt Brace and World, 1955), 53.

50
John Stuart Mill, England and Ireland (London: Longmans, 1868). See also
his Chapters and Speeches on the Irish Land Question (London: Longmans,
1870).

51
England and Ireland, 7.

52
LL, CW, XVI, 1328.

53
Koppel S. Pinson, Bibliographical Introduction to Nationalism (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1935), 13.

54
See, e.g., EL, CW, XIII, 642, 660, 687, and 737.

55
The founding of South Australia benefited from the zealous efforts of
the National Colonization Society and other groups which received Mill’s
blessing. See Douglas Pike, The Paradise of Dissent (Melbourne:
Melbourne University Press, 1957), and Donald Winch, Classical Political
Economy and Colonies (Cambridge, Mass. Harvard University Press, 1965),
especially Chapter vi. Mill extolled the plans for establishing South
Australia in Examiner, 20 July, 1834, 453-4.

56
Consult in particular London and Westminster Review, XXVIII (January,
1838), 502-33; ibid., XXIV (August, 1838), 507-12 (2nd ed., only), and
ibid., XXXII (December, 1838), 241-60.

57
EL, CW, XIII, 426.

58
The issues involved here have been critically examined by Ged Martin,
The Durham Report and British Policy (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1972), 42-74.

59
Goldwin Smith, The Empire (Oxford and London: Parker, 1863). Consult
also R. S. Neale, “Roebuck’s Constitution and the Durham Proposals,”
Historical Studies Australia and New Zealand, XV (1971), 579-90.

60
LL, CW, XV, 784; cf. 965.

61
LL, CW, XVII, 1685.

62
These papers were published for the East India Company by Cox and Wyman,
London, 1858.

63
See George D. Bearce, “John Stuart Mill and India,” Journal of the
Bombay Branch of the Royal Astatic Society, XXVII (December, 1954),
67-80. A useful general study is Eric Stokes. The English Utilitarians
and India (Oxford, 1959).

64
Abram L. Harris, “John Stuart Mill: Servant of the East India Company,”
Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science, XXX (May, 1964),
196. See also Gerald Sirkin and Natalie Robinson Sirkin, “Mill in India
House, A Little Bureaucratic Tale in Two Letters,” Mill News Letter, IX
(Summer, 1974), 3-7. This article contains references to other relevant
articles by Gerald Sirkin and Natalie Robinson Sirkin.

65
Principles of Political Economy Collected Works, II (Toronto: University
of Toronto Press, 1965), 319.

66
Donald Winch. Classical Political Economy and Colonies, 168.

67
From the outset the book provoked controversy. J. S. Rees, Mill and His
Early Critics (Leicester: Leicester University College, 1956), discusses
certain reviews of it between 1859 and Mill’s death in 1873 which were
critical, among other things, of its individualistic assumptions and
concept of liberty. A modern writer, Gertrude Himmelfarb, examines
Mill’s main argument in On Liberty and Liberalism: The Case of John
Stuart Mill (New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 1974) and contends that it runs
counter to his position in other writings Carl J. Friedrich, ed., Nomos
IV Liberty (New York: Atherton Press, 1966), collects a series of
reflective studies commemorating the centennial of Mill’s work, and
useful in this connection is one by David Spitz. “Freedom and
Individuality: Mill’s Liberty in Retrospect.” Richard B. Friedman
examines Mill’s argument afresh in “A New Exploration of Mill’s Essay on
Liberty,” Political Studies, XIV (October, 1966), 281-304. Maurice
Cowling in Mill and Liberalism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1963) presents a novel and telentless criticism of Mill as an
authoritarian bent on establishing a new religion of humanity on the
basis of social science. The book and the reaction to it among scholars
illustrate the wide range of controversial opinion that On Liberty can
still provoke. For a selection of other interesting commentaries see
Peter Radcliff ed. Limits of Liberty: Studies of Mill’s On Liberty
(Belmont, California: Wodsworth Publishing Company, 1966). A British
jurist’s views on Mill and morals are reflected in Patrick Devlin. The
Enforcement of Morals (London: Oxford University Press, 1965), Chap. vi.

68
J. C. Rees attempts to assess these influences in “A Phase in the
Development of Mill’s Ideas on Liberty,” Political Studies, VI
(February, 1958), 33-44.

69
Noel Annan, The Curious Strength of Positivism in English Political
Thought (London: Oxford University Press, 1959), 16.

70
David Riesman, Reuel Denney, and Nathan Glazer in The Lonely Crowd (New
Haven Yale University Press, 1950), 301, pay tribute to Mill for
foreshadowing the arguments of modern sociologists on social conformity
and the subtle effects of public opinion in a democracy. See also
Sheldon S. Wolin, Politics and Vision (Boston Little: Brown and Company,
1960), 349-50.

71
Autobiography, 116.

72
W. L. Courtney, Life and Writings of John Stuart Mill (London: Walter
Scott Publishing Co., 1889), 126-7. Courtney also quotes Caroline Fox on
“that terrible book of John Mill’s on Liberty, clear and calm and cold,
he lays it on as a tremendous duty to get oneself well contradicted and
admit always a devils advocate into the presence of your dearest most
sacred truths” (ibid., 125).

73
Gertrude Himmelfarb in On Liberty and Liberalism, 36-56, discusses some
of Mill’s contradictions.

74
EL, CW, XII, 153.

75
Mill read von Humboldt’s work. The Sphere and Duties of Government,
after its appearance in an English translation in 1854.

76
Leslie Stephen, The English Utilitarias (London: Duckworth and Co.,
1900), III, 269.

77
Himmelfarb, On Liberty and Liberalism, 321.

78
EL, CW, XIII, 731. See Mill’s extensive defence of the revolution in the
Westminster Review, LI (April, 1849), republished in Dissertations and
Discussions, II, 335-410.

79
EL, CW, XIII, 740-1.

80
Lionel Robbins, The Theory of Economic Policy in English Classical
Political Economy (London: Macmillan, 1952), 143.

81
Dissertations and Discussions, II, 388.

82
LL, CW, XIV, 85. See also his views in another letter of the same year,
ibid., 87.

83
Quoted in J. P. Mayer, Prophet of the Mass Age (London: Dent, 1939), 20.

84
LL, CW, XV, 553.

85
There are many references to Mill in Bernard Shaw, ed., Fabian Essays in
Socialism (London: Walter Scott, 1899). In this book Sidney Webb pays a
special tribute to Mill (on page 58). There are also many references to
Mill in Sidney and Beatrice Webb, Industrial Democracy, 2nd ed (London:
Longmans, 1898).

86
LL, CW, XVI, 1248. See also a letter to Georg Brandes on 4 March, 1872,
in LL, CW, XVII, 1874-5, which discusses the First International.

87
LL, CW, XVII, 1910-12 (4/10/72).

88
Henry Collins and Chimen Abramsky. Karl Marx and the British Labour
Movement Years of the First International (London: Macmillan, 1965), 269
cite references on the response to Mill’s letter. See also Lewis S.
Feuer “John Stuart Mill and Marxian Socialism,” Journal of the History
of Ideas, X (1949), 297-303.

89
A modern assessment is that by John Vincent, The Formation of the
Liberal Party, 1857-1868 (London: Constable, 1966). For the marked
influence of Mill on John Morley and other leading liberals of the time
see Frances Wentworth Knickerbocker. Free Minds, John Morley and His
Friends (Cambridge: Harvard Press, 1943).

90
John Morley, Recollections (Toronto: Macmillan, 1971), I, 61.

1
Fuller comment on the principles of inclusion and exclusion, and of
editing procedures in these volumes, will be found in the Textual
Introduction to Collected Works (henceforth indicated as CW), IV (Essays
on Economics and Society), xliii ff. and in my “Principles and Methods
in the Collected Edition of John Stuart Mill,” in John M. Robson, ed.,
Editing Nineteenth-Century Texts (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1967), 96-122.

2
Mill discusses the question briefly in the “Preface” to Dissertations
and Discussions, reprinted in CW, X, 493-4, there are no specific
references therein to the essays here reprinted.

3
Specific details about the provenance and publishing history of the
essays are given in individual headnotes to each. When Mill entitled an
article, his title is of course used, but when, as is common in the
Reviews of the period, the essays were not headed by titles, the running
titles are used; to distinguish between the two reviews of Tocqueville’s
Democracy in America, “[I]” and “[II]” have been added to their titles,
and a descriptive title has been added to Mill’s letter on civil service
examinations.

4
The relation is demonstrated in his quoting from both reviews of Lewis
in his System of Logic (see CW, VII, 153n-154n VIII, 818).

5
He merely mentions “several papers he contributed to Tait’s in 1832
(actually two appeared in 1832, and two in 1833). See Autobiography ed.
Jack Stillinger (Boston: Houghton Mifflin 1969), 109 (Subsequent
references to the Autobiography are to this edition, and are given, when
practicable, in the text).

6
Later Letters, ed. Francis E. Mineka and Dwight N. Lindley CW, XVII
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1972), 1957. Subsequent
references to the four volumes of Later Letters (including some earlier
letters, such as this one discovered after the appearance of the earlier
volumes), as well as to the two volumes of Earlier Letters (ed. Mineka
[Toronto University of Toronto Press, 1963]), are given (when
practicable, in the text) simply by LL (for Earlier Letters) or LL (for
Later Letters) and CW, with the volume and page number, and, where
necessary, the date in short form (23/5/32 means 23 May, 1832).

7
The parts of “Rationale of Representation” and “De Tocqueville on
Democracy in America [I]” that were republished as “Appendix” in the
first volume of Dissertations and Discussions have been cited frequently
by commentators on Mill’s political views, especially on his alleged
elitism. It will be noted that Mill made some changes in their texts in
the reprinted versions (ten in the first essay, twenty in the second);
he also altered slightly (three changes) the passage from “Remarks on
Bentham’s Philosophy” that he quotes in “Rationale of Representation”
and the passages (eight changes) from “De Tocqueville on Democracy in
America [I]” that he incorporated in “De Tocqueville on Democracy in
America [II]” for the version in Dissertations and Discussions (the
passages do not appear in the periodical version). While most of these
variants are of a minor kind, some of them, especially in the context of
other changes made for Dissertations and Discussions, are not without
interest, see, e.g., 23e-e, 72h-h, i-i, k-k.

8
CW, X, 493.

9
The others are briefly commented on in the Textual Introduction to CW,
IV, xliv-xlv.

10
John Stuart Mill (London: Longmans, 1882). 46-7. Mill’s next review of
Bailey, on a non-political subject, Berkeley’s theory of vision, was
unfavourable, see CW, XI.

11
EL, CW, XII, 249.

12
See ibid., 259, 261, 263. That Mill had read the book before the July
number appeared is shown by the reference at 18n below. His review was
“nearly finished” in September (ibid., 272).

13
See especially ibid., 265, 272, 283-4, 287-8, 300: Tocqueville,
Correspondance anglaise, Vol. VI of Œuvres, Papiers et Correspondances,
ed J.-P. Mayer (12 vols Paris: Gallimard, 1951-70), 302-4: and also, for
James Mill’s reaction, Autobiography, 121. A later judgment by Mill of
Tocqueville’s too harsh view of democracy is seen in LL, CW, XVI, 1055
(24/5/65).

14
John Stuart Mill, 48.

15
In the Early Draft (ed. Jack Stillinger [Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 1961]), 159, the words “and moral” do not appear.

16
EL, CW, XII, 360 (24/11/37). “On the Definition of Political Economy”
was also republished, in his Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of
Political Economy (1844).

17
Bam remarks (John Stuart Mill, 55), with some justification, if one is
thinking of the period up to Harriet’s death at the end of 1858, that
Mill’s “Reorganization of the Reform Party,” which appeared in the
London and Westminster for April, 1839, was his farewell to political
agitation. It was not, of course, a farewell to political thought, even
during those years.

18
See, for example, the satiric treatment in the essays by the two Mills
in the first and second numbers of the Westminster (1824).

19
EL, CW, XIII, 433-4 (the letter continues with the passage quoted above,
concerning Mill’s switch of allegiance to the Edinburgh), 457-8, and
Tocqueville. Œuvres VI, 330.

20
Undoubtedly Mill would agree with Bain’s comment (John Stuart Mill, 47)
that the first “may be considered as superseded” by the second, but the
articles are quite different in approach, and it should be noted that
not only the interpolated passages but also the latter half of the
“Appendix” to Vol. I of Dissertations and Discussions gave further
currency to parts of the first review (see Appendix B, 650-3 below).

21
There are also six variants (excluding those simply relating to the
convenience of quotation) from the original text of the passage quoted
from his first review of Tocqueville, and five from that of the passage
quoted from his review of Duveyrier.

22
See, e.g., the five extracts of his evidence before Parliamentary
committees, dating from this period, that are printed in Vol. V of the
Collected Works.

23
LL, CW, XIV, 184, 187-8, 205-7. The sentence referred to is almost
certainly that on 209-10 where Mill attacks Jowett’s suggestions, what
the earlier version was is not known, as Trevelyan marked it on a proof
copy that has not been found.

Mill’s continued enthusiasm for such measures may be seen in a letter of
1869 recommending open competition for offices in the United States
(ibid., XVII, 1572).

24
For comments on the others, see the Textual Introduction, CW, X,
cxxii-cxxix.

25
LL, CW, XIV, 294. Cf. his comment to her four days later: “With
returning health & the pleasure of this place [Rome] I find my activity
of mind greater than it has been since I set out & I think I shall be
able & disposed to write a very good volume on Liberty, if we decide
that that is to be the subject” (ibid., 300). Apparently he still had
not spent time on the Capitol, which he mentions in a letter of 24 Jan.,
five further days later (ibid., 307).

26
Ibid., 320 (9/2/55), from Naples.

27
See his diary note for 19 Jan., 1854: “I feel bitterly how I have
procrastinated in the sacred duty of fixing in writing, so that it may
not die with me, everything that I have in my mind which is capable of
assisting the destruction of error and prejudice and the growth of just
feelings and true opinions” (Hugh S. R. Elliot, ed., The Letters of John
Stuart Mill [London: Longmans, Green, 1910], II, 361).

28
See LL, CW, XIV, 142 (29/1/54), to Harriet.

29
See EL, CW, XIII, 411 (4/11/39), to John Sterling. The revived notion
may well partly derive from Mill’s reading of Macaulay’s Essays at this
time (see ibid., XIV, 332 [17/2/55], to Harriet), as the original idea
may have come from the publication of Carlyle’s.

30
LL, CW, XIV, 348 (25/2/55), from Palermo. In the event, other factors
outweighed this consideration, and Mill offered Parker On Liberty and
Dissertations and Discussions at the same time, though suggesting (as
actually happened. On Liberty appearing in February, and Dissertations
and Discussions in April, 1859) that the latter be published “somewhat
later in the season” (ibid., XV, 579 [30/11/58]).

31
John Stuart Mill, 95.

32
LL, CW, XV, 519. Actually the year does not appear on this letter, but
its being dated from India House rules out any later edition of the
Principles, and the other information rules out earlier ones.

Internal evidence shows that at least part of the text of Chap. iv was
composed after the beginning of October, 1856 (see 287n), and one
footnote was added as late as 1858, presumably after the text had taken
substantially its final form (see 228n), it might be inferred that those
at 231n, and 240n (after mid-1857) were added at the same time.

33
Ibid., 578-9. The letter, which includes also the offer of Dissertations
and Discussions (with a list of contents), proposes that the payment for
On Liberty be on the same terms as for the Principles, that is, “one
edition at half profit,” with renegotiation for later editions. When a
second edition was called for (it appeared in August, 1859), he wrote to
Parker to say that he thought he could “fairly ask for £200 for the
edition,” if 2000 copies were printed (ibid., 630).

34
He omits what he might well have mentioned, the place the work has in
the Philosophic Radical tradition (cf. Bain, John Stuart Mill, 104), and
his own previous arguments for freedom of thought and action. (For a
useful gathering of early texts, see Bernard Wishy, ed., Prefaces to
Liberty Selected Writings of John Stuart Mill [Boston: Beacon Press,
1959].)

35
Autobiography, 152 Cf. the dedication to Harriet, 216 below, and his
response to Frederick Furnivall’s approbation of the work and especially
of its dedication which, Mill says, “caused me a still deeper feeling, I
did not for a moment think of doing any good by those few words of
preface, but only of expressing some insignificant fraction of what I
feel to the noblest and wisest being I have known. But I could do
nothing more useful with the rest of my life than devote it to making
the world know and understand what she was, if it were possible to do
it.” (LL, CW, XV, 615 [4/4/59].)

An early indication of his resolution not to revise On Liberty is shown
in his letter to Parker concerning the second edition: “I do not propose
to make any additions or alterations” (ibid., 630 [18/7/59]).

36
It would appear that most pages of the 2nd edition were reprinted from a
second state of the first edition. All the accidentals (six, three of
which are unique to the 2nd edition) as well as the three substantives
(which are continued in the 3rd and 4th editions) occur in Chapter v,
between pp. 177 and 192 of the original (where probably the text was
reset). That Mill did not pay much heed to the 2nd edition is indicated
by his failure in it to correct the title of Comte’s work (227c-c),
mentioned in the text immediately below.

37
The fourth of his works to appear in a People’s Edition was the Logic,
which was published posthumously in 1884 (see Collected Works, VII,
lxxxvi). After the issuance of the People’s Editions, no further Library
Editions of Representative Government were called for, and only one each
of On Liberty (1869) and the Principles (1871), while there were two
more of the Logic (1868 and 1872), which had already gone through six
Library Editions (the first in 1843), compared to five of the Principles
(the first in 1848), three of On Liberty (the first in 1859), and three
of Representative Government (the first in 1861).

Our policy in this edition is to accept the final Library Edition in
Mill’s lifetime as copy-text, and not to record in the usual fashion
substantive variants occurring uniquely in the People’s Editions;
however, in the case of On Liberty and Representative Government, the
widespread use of the People’s Editions (and of reprints from them)
suggested the propriety of listing the substantive variants, as is done
in Appendices D. and E. Attention may be called to one of these in On
Liberty, both because the passage in which it occurs is frequently
quoted, and because it has more importance than might at first appear at
224.32 the People’s Edition reads “of a man” rather than “of man”.
(Concerning Representative Government, see also lxxxvi-lxxxvii below.)

38
See Autobiography, 165 For the financial arrangements, which were
confused by an error in advertised price, see LL, CW, XV, 921, 964: XVI,
1035, 1040-1, 1044: XVII, 1815, 1819, 1820.

39
Plural voting, about which he had not consulted Harriet (Autobiography,
153) was never as important to him as the other proposals in Thoughts on
Parliamentary Reform, though he continued to hold by it. See LL, CW, XV,
606 (17/3/59, to Bain) and ibid., 596 and 597 (2/3/59, to John E.
Cairnes and to Holyoake); in the letter to Cairnes the question of
double voting (election a deux degres) is examined as a substitute.
Fuller discussion of all these matters is found in Considerations on
Representative Government.

40
See the letter to Bain cited in the previous note.

41
See John M. Robson, “ ‘Joint Authorship’ Again: The Evidence in the
Third Edition of Mill’s Logic.” Mill News Letter, VI (Spring, 1971),
18-19.

42
See LL, CW, XIV, 218 (24/6/54) and 222 (30/6/54). Cf. ibid., XV, 559,
592, 601, 667, and also 619 (14/5/59), when, probably referring mainly
to On Liberty and to “Enfranchisement of Women,” in Dissertations and
Discussions, II, Mill may also have had in mind the rejection of the
secret ballot, in writing to Harriet’s brother. Arthur Hardy: “I have
been publishing some of her opinions. . . .”

43
See LL, CW, XV, 598-9, 613.

44
See ibid., 656 (21/12/59), to Charles Dupont-White, and 339k below.

45
Like other essays reprinted in the third volume of Dissertations and
Discussions, these two reveal very few substantive changes, there being
eleven in Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform and thirteen (including those
in self-quotations) in “Recent Writers on Reform.” Of the former, two
merit mention here: 339k, where Mill introduced reference to Hare’s
scheme for proportional representation in the second pamphlet edition (a
passage excised from the reprint in Dissertations and Discussions, as
mentioned above); and 332f-f, where (arguing against the secret ballot)
in 1867 Mill identities as his father the “philosopher who did more than
any other man of his generation towards making Ballot the creed of
Parliamentary Reformers.” None of the variants in “Recent Writers on
Reform” calls for special comment.

46
In fact, he quotes from both essays in Chapter x. “Of the Mode of
Voting,” which incorporates the discussion of the ballot in Thoughts on
Parliamentary Reform (see 491-5 below). His discussion of Considerations
on Representative Government in the Autobiography (157-8) gives, like
most of his comments on his writings, an overview, though many of the
detailed questions not mentioned there are touched on in other sections
of the Autobiography to which references have been given above.

47
LL, CW, XV, 716, cf. Bain. John Stuart Mill, 116 Cf. also Autobiography,
157, where he refers to his work in 1860-61, and mentions The Subjection
of Women (not published until 1869).

48
Ibid., 690 (6/4/60) and 721 (4/3/61).

49
Ibid., 730 (5/7/61), to Hare, and 737 (8/8/61), to Dupont-White, the
latter indicating that the second edition was about to appear. For the
major variants see 462i-i and 528n below.

50
Ibid., 964, to William Longman.

51
Ibid., 969 (1/12/64), to Hare, and XVI, 992 (9/2/65), to Joseph Henry
Allen.

52
It sold for 2s., though 2/6 was the price first agreed on. See ibid.,
921 (24/2/64) 964 (6/11/64); XVI, 1035 (17/4/65) and 1040 (30/4/65). For
a further issue, see XVII, 1819 (15/5/71).

53
See ibid., XV, 715 (24/12/60), to Dupont-White.

54
See ibid., and 721 (4/3/61).

55
Ibid., 725-6, cf. his letter to Dupont-White on the same day, 724.

56
See ibid., 729 (26/5/61), 753 (4/12/61), 761 (10/1/62), and 764
(12/1/62, to Grote).

57
See Editor’s Note, 580 below.

58
The argument for this practice is given in my “Principles and Methods in
the Collected Edition of John Stuart Mill,” in John M. Robson, ed.,
Editing Nineteenth-Century Texts (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1967), 96-122.

59
See 243 and 358; for the first, cf. 252 and 257, for the second, 352.

60
Typographical errors in earlier versions are ignored. The following are
corrected (the erroneous reading is given first, followed by the
corrected reading in square brackets):

4.36 King—[King.]

25.38 constitueney [constituency]

102.25 sym [sym-] [dropped character]

111.24 “[‘] [this edition restyles quotation marks]

141.3 distinterestedly [disinterestedly]

146.30 [line space omitted in 67: added as in 36.59]

155.11 channel [Channel] [as in 40,75]

156.26 M [M.]

161.42 Is it [It is] [as in 40.59]

196.16 country, [country.]

201.2 govern [govern-] [dropped character]

256.12 been [being]

269.13 individuasl [individuals]

302.34 generation [generation,] [as in 591,592]

320.3 parliament [Parliament] [as in same paragraph, and in 592]

387.23 permanence [Permanence] [as in 611,612]

393.18 it [it.]

402.42 racalcitrant [recalcitrant]

417.1 upo [upon]

419.22 mentioned [mentioned.]

432.14 acts: [acts;] [as in 611]

464.23 candidates [candidates.]

470.31 bu [but]

494.26 kind [kind.]

514.40-1 overagainst [over against] [as in People’s Edition]

549.11 non German [non-German] [as in 611,612]

576.31-2 equally and [equally unknown and] [as in 611,612]

635.n1 T. [J.] [correctly given in Source]

641.n1 ἤκιστα ἥκιστα

641.n3 ἀρχόντας ἄρχοντας

647.6 von [van]

61
In a few cases my reading of the manuscript differs from that in the
edition by Ney MacMinn, J. M. McCrimmon, and J. R. Hainds, Bibliography
of the Published Writings of J. S. Mill (Evanston: Northwestern
University Press, 1945), to which page references (as MacMinn) are given
in the headnotes. The corrected scribal errors (the erroneous reading
first, with the corrected one following in square brackets) are:

92.18 entituled [entitled]

92.18 America, [America,”]

118.5-6 entituled [entitled]

206.4-5 hereupon [thereupon]

206.5 1844-5 [1854-5]

214.4 past [post]

342.13 Austen [Austin]

372.4 Representable [Representative]

580.7 Bant’s [Barrot’s]

62
Following the page and line notation, the first reference is to JSM’s
identification, the corrected identification (that which appears in the
present text) follows in square brackets. There is no indication of the
places where a dash has been substituted for a comma to indicate
adjacent pages, where “P.” or “Pp.” replaces “p.” or “pp.” (or the
reverse), or where the volume number has been added to the reference. In
“De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [I],” where appropriate, page
references to the French original are added, and “Reeve” inserted before
the references given by Mill

76.13 p. 58 [pp. 58-9]

76.n1 p. 313 [pp. 313-14]

102.34 p. 284, notes [pp. 284-6]

105.n11 p. 268, notes [pp. 268-9]

107.41-67 [47]

112.8-9 p. 252-263 [pp. 252-3, 261-3]

113.n5 p. 9 [pp. 9-10]

173.13-14 Ibid. [Reeve, Vol. II, pp. 118-19; Tocqueville, Vol. II, pp.
111-13]

261.n2 11-13 [11.13]

346.37 p. 13 [Pp. 13-14] [reference moved to end of quoted passage]

350.41 p. 23 [Pp. 23-5] [reference moved to end of quoted passage]

355.32 p. 17 [Pp. 17-18]

369.26 p. 126 [Pp. 126-7]

495.n1 32-36 [31-7]

496.n3 p. 39 [pp. 39-40]

497.n12-13 26 and 32 [32 and 26]

596.22 p. 268 [pp. 267-8]

597.3 297-9 [298-9]

598.36 p. 277 [pp. 277-8]

608.19 p. 586 [pp. 586-7]

610.17 p. xxi [pp. xxi-xxii]

611.8-127 [126]

612.18 P. xxix [Pp. xxix-xxx]

612.26 P. 361 [Pp. 360-1]

612.39-15 [15-16]

622.32 p. 263 [Pp. 263-5]

626.20 p. 13 [Pp. 13-16]

626.36 p. 162 [Pp. 162-3]

629.33 p. 156 [Pp. 156-9] [transferred from 628.43 for clarity]

635.33-4 p. 60 [Pp. 60-1]

636.23 p. 65 [Pp. 63-5]

641.11 p. 132 [Pp. 132-3]

642.6 p. 36 [Pp. 36-7]

643.38 p. 54 [Pp. 53-6]

644.14 p. 21 [Pp. 21-2]

644.32 p. 30 [Pp. 30-1]

645.21 p. 37 [Pp. 37-8]

645.37 p. 144 [Pp. 144-5]

646.11 p. 220 [Pp. 220-1]

646.37 p. 233 [Pp. 233-5]

[*]
Carl Otfried Mueller, The History and Antiquities of the Doric Race, 2
vols. (Oxford: Murray, 1830); August Boeckh, The Public Economy of
Athens, 2 vols. (London: Murray, 1828).

[†]
An Examination of Some Passages in Dr. Whately’s Elements of Logic
(Oxford: Parker, 1829).

[*]
John Milton, Artis Logicæ (London: Hickman, 1672).

*
The greatest English poet of our own times lays no claim to this
glorious independence of any obligation to pay regard to the laws of
thought. Those whom Mr. Wordsworth honours with his acquaintance, know
it to be one of his favourite opinions, that want of proper intellectual
culture, much more than the rarity of genius, is the cause why there are
so few true poets; the foundation of poetry, as of all other productions
of man’s reason, being logic. By logic, he does not mean syllogisms in
mode and figure, but justness of thought and precision of language; and,
above all, knowing accurately your own meaning.

While we are on this subject, we must be permitted to express our
regret, that a poet who has meditated as profoundly on the theory of his
art, as he has laboured assiduously in its practice, should have put
forth nothing which can convey any adequate notion to posterity of his
merits in this department; and that philosophical speculations on the
subject of poetry, with which it would be folly to compare any others
existing in our language, have profited only to a few private friends.

*
Mr. Lewis has very properly, in our opinion, spared himself the
ostentatious candour of mentioning the authors to whom he was indebted,
they being mostly writers of established reputation. Such studious
honesty in disclaiming any private right to truths which are the common
property of mankind, generally implies either that the author cares, and
expects the reader to care, more about the ownership of an idea than
about its value, or else that he designs to pass himself off as the
first promulgator of every thought which he does not expressly assign to
the true discover. This is one of the thousand forms of that commonest
of egotisms, egotism under a shew of modesty. The only obligations which
Mr. Lewis with a just discrimination stops to acknowledge, are to a
philosopher who is not yet so well known as he deserves to be, Mr.
Austin, Professor of Jurisprudence in the University of London.

[*]
The reference is mistaken. See, rather, Plato, Theaetetus, in Theaetetus
and Sophist (Greek and English), trans. H. N. Fowler (London: Heinemann;
New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1921), p. 30 (149a-b); cf. p. 76 (161e).

[*]
James Boswell, Life of Johnson, ed. G. B. Hill and L. F. Powell, 6 vols.
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1934-50), Vol. II, p. 249 (7/5/73).

a-a
[quoted in JSM’s Logic, Collected Works, Vol. VIII, p. 818]

b-b
51—72 i.e.

c-c
-51—72

d-d
-51—72

e-e
MS—46 right

f-f
-MS—72

g-g
51—72 People

h-h
-62—72

[*]
John Locke, Two Treatises on Government, in Works, 10 vols. (London:
Tegg et al., 1823), Vol. V, pp. 209-485.

[*]
Ibid., p. 346 (Bk. II, Chap. ii, §14).

[*]
James Mill, Government (London: Traveller Office, 1821), p. 31.

[†]
James Mill, Elements of Political Economy, 3rd ed. (London: Baldwin,
Cradock, and Joy, 1826).

[‡]
Tacitus, The Annals, in The Histories and the Annals (Latin and
English), trans. Clifford Moore and John Jackson, 4 vols. (London:
Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1925-37), Vol. II, p. 566 (III,
xxviii).

*
The most important contribution which has been made for many years to
the Philosophy of Government, in this extensive sense of the term, is
the recent work of M. Alexis de Tocqueville, De la Démocratie en
Amérique [2 vols. Paris: Gosselin, 1835]; a book, the publication of
which constitutes an epoch in the kind of writing to which it belongs. A
minute analysis of this admirable work will be given in our next Number.
[J. S. Mill, “De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [I],” London
Review, I (Oct., 1835), 85-129. Printed below, pp. 47-90.] The Tory
writers have already, we perceive, attempted to press it into their
service, as an attack upon Democracy: in opposition both to the author’s
avowed opinions, and to his purpose expressly declared in the work
itself, M. de Tocqueville’s views are eminently favourable to Democracy,
though his picture, like every true picture of anything, exhibits the
shadows as well as the bright side; and as it keeps back nothing,
supplies materials from which Democracy may, as suits the purpose of a
writer, be either attacked or defended, and, we may add, better attacked
and better defended than it could ever have been before.

[*]
Thomas Babington Macaulay, “Mill’s Essay on Government,” Edinburgh
Review, XLIX (March, 1829), 186-7.

[*]
David Hume, “Of Commerce,” in Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects,
2 vols. (London: Cadell, 1793), Vol. I, p. 251.

[†]
Edmund Burke, “A Letter to John Farr and John Harris, Esqs. Sheriffs of
the City of Bristol, on the Affairs of America,” in Works, 8 vols.
(London: Dodsley and Rivington, 1792-1827), Vol. II, p. 145.

[*]
Edmund Burke, “Speech on . . . a plan for the better security of the
independence of Parliament, and the oeconomical reformation of the Civil
and other establishments,” in Works, Vol. II, p. 217.

[†]
James Mill, A Fragment on Mackintosh (London: Baldwin and Cradock,
1835).

[‡]
Ibid., pp. 288-9.

a-a
24 [reprinted as first part of “Appendix,” Dissertations and
Discussions, I, 467-70, below, pp. 648-50]

b-b
59,67 the

c-c
59,67 ought not to

d-d
59,67 this

e-e
59,67 public

f-f
59,67 Of all modern governments, however

g-g
-67

h-h
59,67 strongly organized aristocracy of

i-i
59,67 When

j-j
-59,67

k-k
59,67 few . . . few . . . many . . . many

[*]
See James Mill. “The Ballot—A Dialogue.” London Review, I (April, 1835),
201-53.

*
Take, for instance, the strongest of all cases, and one in which nobody
ever doubted the propriety of the exclusion—the case of children. Is it
true that their interest is completely identical with that of their
parents? Certainly not: the child is interested in being secured, in so
far as security is attainable, against the parent’s cruelty, the
parent’s caprice, the parent’s weak indulgence, the parent’s avarice,
and, in at least nine cases out of ten, the parent’s indolence and
negligence, which disregards the child’s good when in competition with
the parent’s ease. It may be said, that all these kinds of misconduct
are inconsistent with the real happiness of the parent, and that the
parent’s interest, rightly understood, and the child’s, are the same.
And so also has it been said, that the true interest of kings is the
same with that of their subjects. There is as much truth in the one
doctrine as in the other. Both are true in a certain sense: both kings
and parents would enjoy greater happiness on the whole, if they could
learn to find it in the happiness of those under their charge. But this
is a capacity seldom acquired after an early age; and those who have not
acquired it, would not gain the pleasures of benevolence, even were they
to forego those of selfishness. If a father be by character a bad and
selfish man, it is not true that his happiness may not be promoted by
tyrannizing over his children. We by no means seek to infer that parents
in general treat their children no better than kings treat their
subjects, or that there is not a far greater coincidence of interest. We
only deny that the coincidence is anything like perfect. But if it be
not perfect between parents and children, still less can it be so in any
other case.

On this principle, our author characterizes the exclusion of women from
the elective franchise as indefensible in principle, and standing on no
better ground than any other arbitrary disqualification.

“The legitimate object of all government—namely, the happiness of the
community—comprehends alike male and female, as alike susceptible of
pain and pleasure; and the principle, that power will be uniformly
exercised for the good of the parties subject to it, only when it is
under their control, or the control of persons who have an identity of
interests with themselves, is equally applicable in the case of both
sexes. The exclusion of the female sex from the electoral privilege can
therefore be consistently contended for only by showing two things;
first, that their interests are so closely allied with those of the male
sex, and allied in such a manner, as to render the two nearly identical;
secondly, that the female sex are incompetent, from want of
intelligence, to make a choice for their own good, and that, on this
account, it would be to the advantage of the community, on the whole, to
leave the selection of representatives to the stronger part of the human
race, the disadvantages arising from any want of perfect identity of
interests being more than compensated by the advantages of that superior
discernment which the male sex would bring to the task. Let us examine,
for a moment, the force of these allegations. The interests of the
female sex are so far from being identified with those of the male sex,
that the latter half of the human species have almost universally used
their power to oppress the former. By the present regulations of
society, men wield over women, to a certain extent, irresponsible power;
and one of the fundamental maxims on which representative government is
founded is, that irresponsible power will be abused. The case before us
presents no exception: the power of man over woman is constantly
misemployed;and it may be doubted whether the relation of the sexes to
each other will ever be placed on a just and proper footing, until they
have both their share of control over the enactments of the legislature.
If none of these regulations applied specifically to women as women, and
to men as men, and to the circumstances arising from their peculiar
connexion with each other, their interests might perhaps be considered
as identified, but in the actual relative position in which by nature
the sexes stand, and must always remain, as two parties marked by
peculiar and indelible differences, separate interests cannot fail to
grow up between them, and numerous laws must be directed to the
regulation of their respective rights and duties. It the enactment of
these laws concerning two parties who have distinct interests is solely
under the control of one party, we know the consequence.” (Pp. 236-8.)

It any exemplification be necessary of these last words, an obvious one
may be found in the disgraceful state of the English law respecting the
property of married women. If women had votes, could laws ever have
existed by which a husband, who perhaps derives from his wife all he
has, is entitled to the absolute and exclusive control of it the moment
it comes into her hands? As to the other objection which our author
anticipates, “incompetency from ignorance,” (a strange objection in a
country which has produced Queen Elizabeth,) of that ignorance the
exclusion itself is the main cause. Was it to be expected that women
should frequently feel any interest in acquiring a knowledge of
politics, when they are pronounced by law incompetent to hold even the
smallest political function, and when the opinion of the stronger sex
discountenances their meddling with the subject, as a departure from
their proper sphere?

Into the reasons of any other kind, which may be given for the exclusion
of women, we shallnot enter, not because we think any of them valid, but
because the subject (though in a philosophical treatise on
representation it could not have been passed over in silence) is not one
which, in the present state of the public mind, could be made a topic of
popular discussion with any prospect of practical advantage. [See “De
Tocqueville on Democracy in America [I].” p. 55n below.]

[*]
See 39 & 40 George III, c. 106 (1800).

[*]
Samuel Taylor Coleridge, “Pitt,” in James Gillman, The Life of Samuel
Taylor Coleridge, 2 vols. (London: Pickering, 1838), Vol. I, p. 199.

[*]
The rubric for the section on masculine nouns in traditional grammars.
See, e.g., An Introduction to the Latin Tongue (Eton: Pote and Williams,
1806), p. 63.

[*]
Horace, Ars Poetica, in Satires, Epistles, and Ars Poetica. Ed. H.
Rushton Fairclough (London: Heinemann, New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1926),
p. 466 (l. 191).

[*]
Edward Lytton Bulwer, England and the English. 2 vols. (London: Bentley,
1833).

[†]
See 2 & 3 William IV, c. 45 (1832).

*
In the impressive words of our author’s argument on the ballot. “If the
electoral body is not to be trusted, there must be something wrong in
its composition; for if it is rightly constituted, the more faithfully
the votes represent its sentiments the better: but on the supposition
that it is wrongly constituted, the course of true policy is clear. The
right way of correcting an evil is, if practicable, to remove its cause,
and not to resort to some expedient for counteracting the mischief as it
is continually evolved from its unmolested source. If the electoral body
is composed of such unsuitable elements, that, if left to itself, the
perpetual result would be the election of improper representatives, and
consequent bad legislation, there cannot be a simpler or more effectual
plan than altering the constitution of that body.” (Pp. 281-2.)

[*]
Andrew Johnston.

*
The long duration of parliaments, which renders it impossible to discard
an unfaithful representative when found out, is also an important
consideration.

“A liberal confidence should be, and naturally will be, given to a
faithful trustee, to execute the trust according to his own judgment;
but if he has time to ruin you long before it is in your power to get
rid of him, you will trust him with nothing that you can by possibility
keep in your own hands. A man who is his own physician generally has a
fool for his patient; but it is better that he prescribe for himself
than obey a physician whom he believes to have been bribed by his heir.”
[J. S. Mill, “Pledges,” Examiner, 1 July, 1832, p. 418.]

We quote this passage from the Examiner (1st July, 1832), which, with
the fearlessness with which it has always thrown itself into the breach
when what it deemed to be essentials of good government were assailed
even by its own friends, has taken a most decided part in opposition to
the exaction of pledges. See also a succeeding article, 15th of the same
month. [J. S. Mill, “Pledges,” ibid., pp. 449-51.]

[*]
Francis Roscommon (pseud.), Letters for the Press: on the Feelings,
Passions, Manners, and Pursuits of Men (London: Wilson, 1832), p. 82.

[†]
See, e.g., Sir James Mackintosh, The History of England, 10 vols.
(London: Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, & Green, 1830-40), Vol. I, p. 72.

[*]
Horace, “Carmina Liber III, xxx,” in Odes and Epodes (Latin and
English). Trans. C. E. Bennett (London: Heinemann; New York: Macmillan,
1914), p. 278 (l. 1).

l-l
33 He [Bentham] was not, I am persuaded, aware, how

m
33 [paragraph] The constitutional writers of our own country, anterior
to Mr. Bentham, had carried feelings of this kind to the height of a
superstition, they never considered what was best adapted to their own
times, but only what had existed in former times, even in times that had
long gone by. It is not very many years since such were the principal
grounds on which parliamentary reform itself was defended. Mr. Bentham
has done much service in discrediting, as he has done completely, this
school of politicians, and exposing the absurd sacrifice of present ends
to antiquated means; but he has, I think, himself fallen into a contrary
error.

n
33 for

*
[J. S. Mill, in] Bulwer’s England and the English, App. [B] to Vol. II
[pp. 342-3 Reprinted, “Remarks on Bentham’s Philosophy,” in Collected
Works, Vol. X, p. 17].

*
“Once upon a time there happened an insurrection among the beasts. The
little beasts grew tired of being eaten by the great ones. The goatish,
sheepish, and swinish multitude grew weary of the sway of the
‘intellectual and virtuous.’ They demanded to be governed by equal laws,
and, as a security for those laws, to have the protection of a
representative government. The Lion, finding himself hard pressed,
called together the aristocracy of the forest, and they jointly offered
a rich reward to whoever could devise a scheme for extricating them from
their embarrassment. The Fox offered himself, and his offer being
accepted, went forth to the assembled multitude, and addressed them
thus: ‘You demand a representative government: nothing can be more
reasonable—absolute monarchy is my abhorrence. But you must be just in
your turn. It is not numbers that ought to be represented, but
interests. The tigerish interest should be represented, the wolfish
interest should be represented, all the other great interests of the
country should be represented, and the great body of the beasts should
be represented. Would you, because you are the majority, allow no class
to be represented except yourselves? My royal master has an objection to
anarchy, but he is no enemy to a rational and well-regulated freedom, if
you forthwith submit, he grants you his gracious pardon and a class
representation.’ The people, delighted to have got the name of a
representation, quietly dispersed, and writs were issued to the
different interests to elect their representatives. The tigers chose six
tigers, the panthers six panthers, the crocodiles six crocodiles, and
the wolves six wolves. The remaining beasts, who were only allowed to
choose six, chose by common consent six dogs. The Parliament was opened
by a speech from the Lion, recommending unanimity. When this was
concluded, the Jackal, who was Chancellor of the Exchequer, introduced
the subject of the Civil List; and, after a panegyric on the royal
virtues, proposed a grant, for the support of those virtues, of a
million of sheep a-year. The proposition was received with acclamations
from the ministerial benches. The Tiger, who was at that time in
opposition, made an eloquent speech, in which he enlarged upon the
necessity of economy, inveighed against the profusion of ministers, and
moved that his Majesty be humbly requested to content himself with half
a million. The Dogs declared, that as kings must eat, they had no
objection to his Majesty’s devouring as many dead sheep as he pleased:
but vehemently protested against his consuming any of their constituents
alive. This remonstrance was received with a general howl. The first
impulse of the representatives of the aristocracy was to fall tooth and
nail upon the representatives of the people. The Lion, however,
representing that such conduct would be dishonourable, and the Fox that
it might provoke a renewal of the insurrection, they abandoned the
intention of worrying these demagogues, and contented themselves with
always outvoting them. The sequel may be guessed. The Lion got his
million of sheep: the Fox his pension of a thousand geese a-year: the
Panthers, Wolves, and the other members of the aristocracy, got as many
kids and lambs, in a quiet way, as they could devour. Even the Dogs,
finding resistance useless, solicited a share of the spoil; and when
they were last heard of, they were gnawing the bones which the Lion had
thrown to them from the relics of his royal table.” [J. S. Mill, “On the
British Constitution,” speech in the London Debating Society, 19 May,
1826. Printed in H. J. Laski, ed., J. S. Mill, Autobiography (London:
Oxford University Press, 1924), pp. 282-3.]

*
In our extracts we follow, as far as possible, Mr. Reeve’s translation.
We have used, however, very freely, the privilege of alteration, when,
even at the expense of elegance, we deemed it possible to render the
meaning more intelligible, or to keep closer than Mr. Reeve has done to
the spirit of the original.

[*]
Reeve, Vol. I, pp. xiii-xiv; Tocqueville, I, pp. 3-4.

*
In quoting the assertions that the democratic principle is carried out
in America to its utmost length, and that equality of condition among
mankind has there reached its ultimate limit, we cannot refrain from
observing (though the remark is foreign to the specific purpose of the
present Article) that both these propositions, though true in our
author’s sense, and so far as is necessary for his purpose, must, in
another sense, be received with considerable limitations. We do not
allude merely to the exclusion of paupers and menial servants, or to the
existence, in many States, of a property qualification for electors
because the qualification probably in no case exceeds the means of a
large majority of the free citizens. We allude, in the first place, to
the slaves; and not only to them, but to all free persons having the
slightest admixture of negro blood, who are ruthlessly excluded, in some
States by law, and in the remainder by actual bodily fear, from the
exercise of any the smallest political right. As for social equality, it
may be judged how far they are in possession of it, when no white person
will sit at the same table with them, or on the same bench in a public
room, and when there is scarcely any lucrative occupation open to them
except that of domestic servants, which in that country the white race
do not relish. It is scarcely necessary to add, that in America as
elsewhere, one entire half of the human race is wholly excluded from the
political equality so much boasted of, and that in point of social
equality their position is still more dependent than in Europe. In the
American democracy, the aristocracy of skin, and the aristocracy of sex,
retain their privileges.

While we are on the subject of the aristocracy of sex, we will take the
opportunity of correcting an error of expression in a recent article
(Review of the Rationale of Representation, p. 353, note [see 29n
above]), which having conveyed to an otherwise friendly critic (the
editor of the Monthly Repository) an erroneous notion of our meaning,
has drawn upon us from him a reproof, which we should have deserved if
we had really meant what we unguardedly said. [See [William Johnson
Fox,] “The London Review No. II,” Monthly Repository, n.s. IX (Sept.,
1835), 627-8.] After expressing our concurrence with the author of the
Rationale, in the opinion that there was no ground for the exclusion of
women, any more than of men, from a voice in the election of those on
whose fiat the whole destinies of both may depend, we declined entering
further into the subject at that time, as not being one “which, in the
present state of the public mind, could be made a topic of popular
discussion with any prospect of practical advantage.” Now, all we meant
to say was (although we did not express it correctly), that we saw no
practical advantage in discussing the mere political question apart from
the social question, and discussing it as a political question, in the
heart of a dissertation devoted wholly to politics whereby the claim
made in behalf of women would be left apparently resting upon a bare
abstract principle, and would be divested of all the advantages which it
derives from being considered as part of a far more comprehensive
question—that of the whole position of women in modern society. That
position appears to us, both in idea and in practice, to be radically
and essentially wrong, nor can we conceive any greater abuse of social
arrangements than that of regularly educating an entire half of the
species for a position of systematic dependence and compulsory
inferiority. But we never could have meant that the faulty social
position and consequent bad education of women, cannot be usefully
discussed in the present state of the public mind; on the contrary, we
know of no question of equal importance which the time is more
completely come for thoroughly discussing.

Among many indications which we could give of an improved tone of
feeling and thinking on this subject, we would point to a late pamphlet,
evidently by a man’s hand, entitled, Thoughts on the Ladies of the
Aristocracy, by Lydia Tomkins [London: Hodgsons, 1835].

[*]
Cf. Psalms, 135:16-17.

*
Vol. I, pp. 95-7, of the original. [Cf. Reeve, Vol. I, pp. 71-3.]

[*]
4 & 5 William IV, c. 76 (1834).

*
We must except the influence reserved to the state governments in the
composition of the federal government, through the choice of the members
of the Senate by the state legislatures.

*
Review of The Rationale of Political Representation, London Review, No.
2. [I.e., that appearing on pp. 15-46 above.]

a-a
74n [republished as second part of “Appendix,” Dissertations and
Discussions, I, 470-4; see below, 650-3]

b-b
59, 67 security

c-c
59, 67 fit use to be made of popular power

d
67 , if he is wise,

e
59, 67 intentions and for

f-f
59, 67 an

g-g
59, 67 though

h-h
-59, 67

i-i
59, 67 , under the check of the freest discussion and the most
unreserved censure, but with the least possible direct interference of
their constituents

j-j
59, 67 according to the judgment

k-k
-59, 67

*
lSome persons, and persons, too, whose desire for enlightened government
cannot be mdoubtedm, do not take so serious a view of this perversion of
the true idea of ndemocracy as we don. They say, it is well that the
many should evoke all political questions to their own tribunal, and
decide them according to their own judgment, because then philosophers
will be compelled to enlighten the multitude, and render them capable of
appreciating their more profound views.

oNo one can attach greater value than we do to this consequence of
popular government, pinp so far as we believe it capable of being
realized; and the argument would be irresistible if, in order to
instruct the people, all that is requisite were to will it; if it were
only the discovery of political truths which required study and wisdom,
and the qevidenceq of them when discovered, could be made apparent at
once to any person of common sense, as well educated as every individual
in the community might and ought to be. But the fact is not so. Many of
the truths of politics (in political economy for instance) are the
result of a concatenation of propositions, the very first steps of which
no one who has not gone through a course of study is prepared to
concede: there are others, to have a complete perception of which
requires much meditation, and experience of human nature. How will
philosophers bring these home to the perceptions of the multitude? Can
they enable common sense to judge of science, or inexperience of
experience? Every one who has even crossed the threshold of political
philosophy knows, that on many of its questions the false view is
greatly the most plausible; and a large portion of its truths are, and
must always remain, to all but those who have specially studied them,
paradoxes, as contrary, in appearance, to common sense, as the
proposition that the earth moves round the sun. The multitude will never
believe rtheser truths, until tendered to them from an authority in
which they have as unlimited confidence as they have in the unanimous
voice of astronomers on a question of astronomy.

sThat they should have no such confidence at present is no discredit to
them: for tshow us the men who are entitled to it!t But we are well
satisfied that it will be given, as soon as knowledge shall have made
sufficient progress among the instructed classes themselves, to produce
something like a general agreement in their opinionsu. Even now, on
those points on which the instructed classes are agreed, the
uninstructed have generally adopted their opinions.a The doctrine of
free trade, for example, is now, in this country, almost universal,
except among those who expect to be personal sufferers by it. When there
shall exist as near an approach to unanimity among the instructed, on
all the great points of moral and political knowledge, we have no fear
but that the many will not only defer to their authority, but cheerfully
acknowledge them as their superiors in wisdom, and the fittest to rule.

Mankind are seldom reluctant to allow the superiority of those who have
worked harder than themselves. That is but a trifling humiliation to
their amour propre. They readily admit the claims of superior
application, whatever may be the case with those of superior genius.

l
59, 67 [continued, not as footnote, but as part of text]

m-m
59, 67 questioned

n-n
59, 67 an enlightened democracy

o
59, 67 [no paragraph]

p-p
-59, 67

q-q
59, 67 evidences

r-r
59, 67 those

s
59, 67 [no paragraph]

t-t
59, 67 where are the persons who . . . it?

u
59, 67 on the leading points of moral and political doctrine

*
Tocqueville, Vol. II, pp. 135-6.

*
See a note (Vol. I, pp. 313-14) to M. [Gustave] de Beaumont’s
interesting and instructive story, Marie, ou, l’Esclavage aux Etats Unis
[2 vols. 2nd. ed. (Paris: Gosselin, 1835)]. We shall probably say
something of this valuable work in a future Number. [See J.S. Mill,
“State of Society in America,” pp. 91-115 below.]

[*]
Andrew Jackson, Proclamation by the President of the United States (10
Dec., 1832). (London: Miller, 1833); Edward Livingston, A System of
Penal Law for the United States of America (Washington, Gales & Seaton,
1828).

v-v
[incorporated in “De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [II]”, see
174u-u below]

w-w
59, 67 Crude and ill-considered legislation

x-x
[incorporated in “De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [II]”, see
175c-c below]

y-y
59, 67 The

z
59, 67 numerous

a-a
59, 67 no country . . . purpose.

b-b
[incorporated in “De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [II]”, see
174w-w below]

c-c
-59, 67

d-d
59, 67 those [printer’s error in 352]

e-e
[incorporated in “De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [II]”, see
175z-z below]

f-f
59, 67 consists

g-g
-59, 67

[*]
Jean de La Bruyère, “Des grands,” Chap. xi of his Les Caractères ou les
mœurs de ce siècle (1688).

*
Vol. I, pp. 84-5 (of the original).

[*]
François Pierre Guillaume Guizot, Cours d’histoire moderne, 6 vols.
(Paris: Pichon and Didier, 1828-32); reviewed by Joseph Blanco White and
J. S. Mill, “Guizot’s Lectures on European Civilization,” London Review,
II (Jan., 1836), 306-36. Alexis de Tocqueville, De la Démocratie en
Amérique; reviewed by J. S. Mill, “De Tocqueville on Democracy in
America [I]” (see 47-90 above).

[*]
Francis Lieber, Reminiscences of an intercourse with George Berthold
Niebuhr (London: Bentley, 1835).

[†]
The review, by Alexander Hill Everett, is of Thomas Hamilton, Men and
Manners in America, 2 vols. (Edinburgh: Blackwood, 1833); the other work
referred to is Hamilton’s The Youth and Manhood of Cyril Thornton, 3
vols. (Edinburgh: Blackwood, 1827).

*
Mr. Abdy has some sensible observations on this point, Vol. I, p. 88.

*
The beneficial effects of the absence of a law and custom of
primogeniture, in producing union in families—a fact so strongly felt in
France, as to be matter of general remark and acknowledgment among
French politicians and writers—appear to be almost equally conspicuous
in America (See Abdy, Vol. I, p. 2, also p. 70.)

The state of law and manners in America on the subject of inheritance is
described with great distinctness and minuteness in pp. 112-14 of the
first volume of Mr. Abdy’s work.

[*]
Mill, “De Tocqueville [I],” pp. 47-90 above, and James Mill,
“Aristocracy,” London Review, II (Jan., 1836), 283-306.

*
An interesting description of American authorship is given by M. de
Beaumont, Chap. xii. [Vol. I, pp. 262-3.] He describes it as a mere
trade; a means of earning a livelihood; a profession—a branch of
industry, and one of the lower, not the higher, branches.

[*]
Edward Gibbon Wakefield, England and America, 2 vols. (London: Bentley,
1833).

*
“I find,” says Dr. Lieber, “that people often compare America with
Europe, when they mean London, Paris, or Rome.” (Vol. I, p. 16.)

†
All the worksbefore us bear the strongest testimony to the degree in
which these qualities are diffused through the whole people of America.
We would instance particularly M. de Beaumont’s note on the “Sociability
of the Americans” (Vol. I, p. 301); meaning by sociability, their
disposition to aid and oblige all who come in their way.

[*]
See De la Démocratie en Amérique, Vol. II, p. 58.

*
See Abdy, Vol. III, pp. 69-70, as to the state of the law on this
subject, in the highly prosperous and industrious state of Ohio.

[*]
François René de Chateaubriand, Itinéraire de Paris à Jerusalem et de
Jerusalem à Paris, 3 vols. (Paris: Le Normant, 1811), Vol. II, p. 44.

*
The following observation by Dr. Lieber (Vol. II, p. 184) is “germane to
the matter” [see Hamlet, V, ii, 152-4]. “General Moreau, when residing
in this country (so said a French gentleman, an acquaintance of mine),
believed that no soldier would be equal to an American if well and
thoroughly disciplined (to be sure the present militia would require
some ‘rubbings’); because, said he, ‘an American doubts of nothing.’ It
was true what Moreau observed, that an American doubts of nothing;
sometimes owing to enterprising boldness: sometimes to want of knowledge
or to self-confidence: always, in a measure, to the fact, that want of
success in an enterprise is not followed in the United States by obloquy
or ridicule, even though the undertaking may have been injudicious.”

M. de Beaumont was much struck, as it was natural that a Frenchman
should be, with the fact, that the Americans, never much elated by
success, are never disheartened by failure, but bear the severest losses
with an external stoicism which is also eminently English, or Scotch,
but which is more natural in America than elsewhere, from the
comparative ease with which all such misfortunes can be repaired.

*
Yet even these disadvantages are, in the opinion of M. de Beaumont, more
than compensated, so far as respects the intelligence of the American
women, by the single fact, that their education continues to the day of
their marriage, which, early though it be, is not so early as the period
at which the boys of America enter into the pursuits of money-getting.
The women of America are, in his opinion, superior in mental culture to
the men.

“The American, from his earliest years, is absorbed in business. He can
scarcely read and write before he becomes commercial; the first sound
which strikes his ears is money; the first voice which he hears is that
of interest; he breathes an atmosphere of trade from his very birth: and
all his earliest impressions tend to fix in his mind, that a life of
business is the only life suitable to man. The fate of a young girl is
different, her moral education lasts to the day of her marriage: she
acquires some knowledge of literature, of history—she usually learns a
foreign language (most commonly the French),—she knows a little music.
Her pursuits and feelings are of an intellectual cast. This young man
and this young woman, so unlike each other, are united in marriage. The
former, according to his habits, passes his time at the banking-house or
the warehouse; the latter, who becomes solitary as soon as she has taken
a husband, compares the lot which has fallen to her in real life, with
the existence she had dreamed of. As nothing in the new world into which
she has entered satisfies her affections, she feeds on chimeras, and
reads novels. Having but little happiness, she is extremely religious,
and reads sermons. When she has children, she lives among them, tends
them, and caresses them. Thus she passes her life. In the evening the
American returns home, anxious, unquiet, oppressed with fatigue. He
brings to his wife the earnings of his labour, and broods already over
the next day’s speculation. He calls for his dinner, and utters not
another word; his wife knows nothing of the business which engrosses his
thoughts; she is an insulated being even in the presence of her husband.
The sight of his wife and children does not withdraw the American from
his practical world; and it so rarely happens to him to give them marks
of affection and tenderness, that the families in which the husband,
after an absence, kisses his wife and children, are called, by way of
nickname, the kissing families. In the eyes of the American, his wife is
not a companion, but a partner, who assists him in laying out, for his
well-being and comfort, the money he gains by his business. The
sedentary and retired lives of the women in the United States, and the
rigour of the climate, explain the general feebleness of their
constitution: they rarely go from home, take no exercise, live on light
food, they almost all have a great number of children; it is no wonder
that they grow old so fast, and die so young.—Such is this lite of
contrast, agitated, adventurous, almost febrile for men; dull and
monotonous for women. It passes in this uniform manner, till the day
when the husband informs the wife that he is a bankrupt, then they must
remove, and begin again elsewhere the same sort of existence” (Vol. I,
pp. 268-9.)

We leave it to the English reader to discriminate how much of this
picture is properly American, and how much is English.

*
See M. de Beaumont, Vol. I, p. 303n, for an instructive sketch of the
difference in manners and social life between the southern, or
slave-states, and the northern. The parallel throws much light upon many
important questions.

[*]
See The Times, 5 Sept., 1835, p. 4, cols. 1-3.

[*]
“Report of William Crawford, Esq., on the Penitentiaries of the United
States, addressed to His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the
Home Department,” Parliamentary Papers, 1834, XLVI, 349-669.

*
“You may see in the farthest west, beyond the boundaries of organized
society, the incipient stages of political relations, of law and justice
laid bare, as if prepared for the student of history, and of the gradual
development of man as a member of political society. Perhaps all this
would become clearer to you, should I write you about the ‘regulators,’
and the manner in which communities, beyond the limits of established
law, meet the imperious necessity of dealing out justice. Of this kind
was one of the most interesting cases that ever came to my knowledge,
when, lately, the assembled men of a district arrested, tried, and
executed a murderer. By what right? By the right to punish crime,
natural, indispensable, and inalienable to every society, and growing
out of the necessity, both physical and moral, of punishment,” (Lieber,
Vol. I, pp. 16-17.)

[†]
See De la Démocratie en Amérique, Vol. II, p. 50.

[‡]
See pp. 47-90 above.

[*]
Edward Everett, “Prince Pückler Muscau and Mrs. Trollope,” North
American Review, XXXVI (Jan., 1833), p. 47.

[*]
Alexander Hill Everett, “Men and Manners in America,” North American
Review, XXXVIII (Jan., 1834), 241-3. Mill gives the reference to the
reprint, pp. 33-4. The “gentleman of this city” was Francis Boott.

[*]
Charles de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu, De l’Esprit des loix, 2 vols.
(Geneva: Barillot, 1748), Vol. I, pp. 14-15.

[†]
A. H. Everett, “Men and Manners in America,” pp. 262-4. Mill’s reference
is to the reprint, pp. 54-5.

*
The federalist reviewer might possibly deny our fact, and claim the palm
of superiority for Mr. Webster: but, viewing that gentleman as one of
the leaders of the absurd Tariff party, we scruple to allow the claim.

†
Mr. Abdy ascribes the ruin of a large proportion of the planters in the
older slave states to the spirit of reckless speculation fostered by
slavery. For the fact itself, see pp. 227 and 247 of the second volume
of his work.

It is a fact strikingly illustrative of the difference between the
spirit of the slave-owning aristocracies of the south, and the
middle-class democracies of the north, that the northern states
encourage schools and neglect colleges, the southern encourage colleges
and neglect elementary schools. Some striking details on this
interesting subject are given by Mr. Abdy, Vol. II, pp. 252-6.

[*]
De la Démocratie en Amérique, Vol. I, p. 85, cf. p. 84 above.

[*]
Frances Trollope, Domestic Manners of the Americans, 2 vols. (London:
Whittaker, Treacher and Co., 1832).

[†]
Washington Irving, History of New York from the beginning of the world
to the end of the Dutch Dynasty, by Diedrich Knickerbocker (London:
Sharpe, 1821).

*
Mr. Shirreff, the intelligent author of a recent agricultural tour
through Canada and the United States, mentions that even a work so
obviously malignant as that of Mrs. Trollope has had a salutary
influence in correcting many of the minor absurdities which it holds up
to ridicule [Patrick Shirreff, A Tour through North America (Edinburgh:
Oliver and Boyd, 1835),] pp. 9-10. [JSM’s footnote.]

[*]
Anon., “Tours in America, by Latrobe, Abdy, &c.,” Quarterly Review, LIV
(Sept., 1835), 408.

a-a
36, 59 human improvement

b-b
36, 59 certain kinds

c-c
36 further

d-d
36 populous

e
36 is

f
36 us

g
36 the consequences,

h-h
36 in the present article invariably

i-i
36 in the narrow

j
36 rather

k-k
+59, 67

l-l
+59, 67

m
36 the

n-n
36 introduced itself

o-o
36 All these

p-p
36 shall attempt to point out

q
36 First, as to property:

r
36 of the vastness

s-s
36 bid him

t-t
36 Look at

u-u
36 impulses cannot

v-v
36 cart-whip

w-w
36 constraining

x-x
36 Look even at

y-y
36 read Napier’s History of the Peninsular War [William Napier, History
of the War in the Peninsula and in the South of France, from the year
1807 to the year 1814, 6 vols. (London: Murray, 1828-40)]; see how
incapable half-savages are of

z-z
36 people

a-a
36 hand [printer’s error?]

b-b
36 seeing

c
36 being

d-d
36 astonishing

e-e
36 the

f-f
36 composed almost entirely

g-g
36 The

h-h
36 a bankrupt body, and the real owners of the bulk of their estates are
the mortgagees

i-i
36 nominally

j-j
36 gone forth

k-k
the voice of the many home

l
36 all

m-m
36 intellectual

n-n
36 and of many of the repulsive qualities of aristocracy

o
36, 59 the

p-p
36 be nothing

q
36 and requires higher powers.

r-r
36 human

[*]
De la Démocratie en Amerique, Vol. I. p. 11; cf. p. 51 above.

s
36 to us

t-t
36 whole

u-u
+59, 67

v-v
36 Radicals

w-w
36 view,

x-x
36 many

y-y
36 Is there one who seeks

z-z
36 he

a-a
36 Is there one who would

b-b
36 Again, is there a Conservative in either house of parliament who
feels

c
36, 59 all

d-d
36 the great instrument of preventing all culture, except the
inculcation of

e-e
36 will

f-f
36 Conservation

g-g
36 blind

h-h
+59, 67

i-i
36 begin by sweeping them from his path

j-j
36 depends

k-k
+59, 67

l-l
36 state

m
36 all

n-n
+59, 67

o-o
36 the more delicate and refined griefs of the imagination and the
affections

p-p
36 keeping as far as possible out of sight, not only actual pain, but
all that can be offensive or disagreeable to the most sensitive person,
that

q-q
36 refined

r-r
+59, 67

s-s
36 When an evil comes to them, they can sometimes bear it with tolerable
patience, (though nobody is less patient when they can entertain the
slightest hope that by raising an outcry they may compel somebody else
to make an effort to relieve them)

t-t
36 brave ridicule, they cannot stand

u-u
36 coteric

v-v
36 make

w
36 of

x-x
36 when

y-y
36 intimately

z-z
36 to

a-a
36 pretend

b-b
36 as a man and a tradesman

c-c
36 true or

d-d
36 [no quotation marks]

e-e
36 outgrowth

f-f
36 doing

g-g
36 a presumption either of] 59 an almost certain presumption either of

h-h
36 excellencies, although] 59 excellencies, though

i
36 [paragraph]

j-j
Source, 36 Who wonders

k-k
Source, 36 no

*
lFrom a paper by the author, not included in the present collection.l

l-l
36 Review of “Austin’s Lectures on Jurisprudence,” in Tait’s [Edinburgh]
Magazine for December, 1832 [Vol. IX, p. 343]

m-m
36 actually

n-n
36 the novel and the magazine, although

[*]
See 6 & 7 William IV, c. 76 (1836).

o
36 much

p-p
36 greatly

q-q
36 charlatanerie

r-r
36 desiderata

s-s
+59, 67

t
36 individual

u-u
36 labours or their capitals

v-v
36 cannot

w-w
36 best equally with the worst

x-x
36 venal paragraphs

y-y
36 name [printer’s error?]

z-z
36 in our own time, has now

[*]
Thomas Carlyle, “Boswell’s Life of Johnson,” Fraser’s Magazine, V (May,
1832), 397. On pp. 396-7, without specific reference to Johnson, Carlyle
says that the age of booksellers had succeeded to the age of patronage.

a-a
+59, 67

b-b
36 must

c-c
36 desiderata

d-d
36 actually administered

e-e
36 nominally

*
From fthe novel of Eustace Conway, attributed to Mr. Mauricef. [John
Frederick Denison Maurice, Eustace Conway: or, The Brother and Sister, 3
vols. (London: Bentley, 1834), Vol. II, pp. 79-81.]

f-f
36 a novel called Eustace Conway, Vol. II, Chap. vi

g
36 , the all but insuperable difficulty,

h-h
36 not the spirit in which the person’s opinions are arrived at and
held, but the opinions themselves, are the main point

i
36 his

j-j
36 Never!

[*]
See, e.g., John Locke, Some Thoughts Concerning Education, in Works,
Vol. IX, pp. 29, 148.

k-k
36 not

l-l
36 religion—even what the Church of England terms religion

[*]
See Connop Thirlwall, A Letter to Thomas Turton on the Admission of
Dissenters to Academical Degrees (Cambridge: Deighton, 1834), pp. 6 ff.

m-m
36, 59 neither of them a useless study

n-n
+59, 67

o
36 just

[†]
Thoughts on the Study of Mathematics, as a Part of a Liberal Education
(Cambridge, 1835).

*
The erudite and able writer in the Edinburgh Review p[Sir William
Hamilton]p, who has expended an almost superfluous weight of argument
and authority in qcombatingq the position incidentally maintained in Mr.
Whewell’s pamphlet, of the great value of mathematics as an exercise of
the mind, was, we think, bound to have noticed the fact that the far
more direct object of the pamphlet was one which partially coincided
with that of its reviewer. [See “Study of Mathematics—University of
Cambridge,” Edinburgh Review, LXII (Jan., 1836), 409-55.] We do not
think that Mr. Whewell has done well what he undertook: he is vague, and
is always attempting to be a profounder metaphysician than he can be;
but the main proposition of his pamphlet is true and important, and he
is entitled to no little credit for having discerned that important
truth, and expressed it so strongly.

p-p
+59, 67 [JSM’s square brackets]

q-q
36 refuting

*
We should except, at Oxford, the Ethics, Politics, and Rhetoric of
Aristotle. These are part of the course of classical instruction, and
are so far an exception to the rule, otherwise pretty faithfully
observed at both Universities, of cultivating only the least useful
parts of ancient literature.

r-r
36 of any kind

s
36 (except professional ones) ever

t-t
36 but the candidates for honours are the few, not the many. Still, if
even the few were mentally benefited, the places

u-u
36 one great mathematician since Newton

v-v
+59, 67

†
[59] Much of what is here said of the Universities, has, in a great
measure, ceased to be true. The legislature has at last asserted its
right of interference [see 17 & 18 Victoria, c. 81 (1854), and 19 & 20
Victoria, c. 88 (1856)]; and even before it did so, wthosew bodies had
already entered into a course of as decided improvement as any other
English institutions. But I leave these pages unaltered, as matter of
historical record, and as an illustration of tendencies. [1859.]

w-w
59 the

x-x
+59, 67

y-y
36, 59 weak

z-z
36 must

a-a
36 , must

b
36 precisely

c-c
36 inculcate

d-d
36 the opinions he inculcates

e-e
36 knows all creeds

f-f
36 The

g
36 Were such the practice here, we believe that the results would
greatly eclipse France and Germany, because we believe that when the
restraints on free speculation and free teaching were taken off, there
would be found in many individual minds among us, a vein of solid and
accurate thought, as much superior in variety and sterling value to any
which has yet manifested itself in those countries (except in one or two
distinguished instances) as the present tone of our national mind is in
many important points inferior.

h-h
36 we have not much space for the discussion of. We may, however, just
indicate a part of what we have not room to enter into more fully.

i-i
36 places

j-j
36 the highest

k
36 not under the puerile notion that political wisdom can be founded
upon it: but partly

l
36 the

m
36 partly

[*]
See J. S. Mill, Autobiography, ed. Jack Stillinger (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1969), p. 107, where the phrase “extraordinary pliability of
human nature” is attributed to John Austin.

n
36 a

o-o
36 will not

p-p
36 mathematics are subservient;

q-q
36 till then . . . not till

r-r
36 We have dwelt so long on the reforms in education necessary for
regenerating the character of the higher classes, that we have not space
remaining to state what changes in forms of polity and social
arrangements we conceive to be required for the same purpose. We can
only just indicate the leading idea.

s
36 , for the first time in Europe,

[*]
Reeve, Vol. II, p. 151; Tocqueville, Vol. II, p. 142.

[†]
See “Opinions of the Present Work,” in the advertisement pages in Reeve,
where Peel’s speech of 12 Jan., 1837, at Glasgow (not Tamworth) is
quoted. For Peel’s speech, see The Times, 16 Jan., 1837, p. 4.

a-a
40 influence of democracy] 59 influence of Democracy

b-b
+67

c-c
40 left much undone, as who could possibly avoid?

d-d
40 showing

[*]
Horace, “Epistle I,” in Satires, Epistles and Ars Poetica, p. 290 (vi.
68).

e
40 (published only this year)

[*]
Cf. Considerations on Representative Government, p. 380 below.

f-f
40 Toward

g-g
Source,40 the

h
40,59 the

i-i
40 it engendered

j-j
40 strength

k
Source,40 the

l-l
Source,40 throwing

m-m
Source,40 has happened

n-n
40 exertions; those

o-o
40 tract [printer’s error?]

p-p
Source,40 citizen

q
40 [footnote:] In this, and our other extracts, we have followed
generally, though not implicitly, Mr. Reeve’s translation. Though not
always unexceptionable, it is spirited, and sometimes felicitous

r-r
40 state

s-s
40 what

t-t
+59,67 [omitted through printer’s error? added by JSM in Somerville
College copy of 40]

u-u
40 although

v-v
40,59 portion

w-w
40 is no easy burden; and at the same time to leave [Somerville College
copy of 40 altered by JSM to it is not easy to do & at the same time to
leave &c.]

[*]
See Cicero, The Letters to his Friends (Latin and English), trans. W.
Glynn Williams, 3 vols. (London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons,
1927-29), Vol. I, p. 403 (V.18.1).

*
[59] The chief exceptions since the accession of the House of Hanover,
are the chemist Cavendish in the last century, and the Earl of Rosse in
the present.

x-x
40 in which they have so much as taken

y-y
+59,67

z-z
40 the greatest

a
40 all

[*]
See Reeve, Vol. II, p. 174; Tocqueville, Vol. II, p. 164.

b-b
+59,67

[*]
4 & 5 William IV, c. 76 (1834).

c-c
40 democracy

d-d
40 Democratic Government

e-e
40 Democratic State of Society

f-f
40 state

g-g
Source,40 acquirements

h-h
Source by their deceit] 40 in their deceit

i-i
Source taste for undertakings of the kind] 40 taste for other
undertakings

j-j
Source,40 adroit

k-k
40 (Reeve, Vol. II, Chap. ii [pp. 138-40].) [Cf. 89-90 above.]

l-l
40 greater

m-m
40 panacea

[*]
Reeve, Vol. II, pp. 115-16; Tocqueville, Vol. II, p. 109.

n-n
40 those [printer’s error?]

o
Source,40 may

p-p
40 contemporaries

q-q
Source,40 prepare

[*]
Cf. pp. 69-70 above.

r-r
40 legislatures [printer’s error?]

s-s
40 which he has

*
[59] A few sentences are here inserted from another paper by the author.
[“De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [I],” pp. 78-9 above.]

t-t
+59,67 [taken from “De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [I],” 78-9
above; the passage is rearranged, and sentences from the original are
omitted. The quoted parts, indicated by u-u, w-w, z-z and c-c, occur in
the earlier essay in the order u-u, c-c, w-w, z-z: the other variant
notes indicate, as usual, changes in wording. See 78-9 above for the
omitted sentences.]

u-u
+59,67 [see t-t above]

v-v
35 In the English aristocracy there has surely been, at all periods,
crude and ill-considered legislation enough. This

w-w
+59,67 [see t-t above]

x
35 (so unalike in other respects)

y-y
35 these [printer’s error?]

z-z
+59,67 [see t-t above]

a-a
35 consist

b
35 utterly

c-c
+59,67 [see t-t above]

d-d
35 In all other matters, the

e-e
+59,67

f-f
35 what country . . . purpose?

g
40 [no paragraph]

h
40 the

i-i
40 crying for

j-j
40,59 Government

k-k
+59,67

l-l
40 the completest

[*]
Michel Chevalier, Lettres sur l’Amérique du Nord, 2 vols. (Paris:
Gosselin, 1836).

m-m
40 among the white population there is

n-n
+59,67

o-o
40 has

p-p
40 Intellect

[*]
Reeve, Vol. III, p. 2; Tocqueville, Vol. III, p. 2.

q-q
40 contemporary

r-r
40 proves

[†]
Reeve, Vol. III, p. 19; Tocqueville, Vol. III, p. 15.

s
40 a

[*]
Reeve, Vol. III, p. 73; Tocqueville, Vol. III, pp. 57-8.

t-t
40 talent

[†]
Reeve, Vol. III, p. 75; Tocqueville, Vol. III, p. 59.

u-u
40 judgments

[*]
Tocqueville, Vol. III, p. 64; cf. Reeve, Vol. III, p. 81.

v-v
40 Sentiments and Morals

[†]
See Marie, Marquise de Sévigné, Lettres, ed. Gérard-Gailly, 3 vols.
(Paris: Gallimard, 1953-57), Vol. I, pp. 894-6.

w-w
40,59 These, however, are

x-x
40 Democracy

y
40 , then,

z
Source, 40 the

a-a
Source,40 lives in

b-b
+59,67 [not in Source]

c
40,59 namely,

d-d
40 (Reeve, Vol. III, Chap. iv [pp. 212-18].)

e-e
40 (Reeve, Vol. III, Chap. viii [pp. 253-6].)

f-f
40 taste for

g-g
40 blasé as [printer’s error?]

h-h
40 breathe; it

i
40 a

j-j
Source,40,59 is

k-k
40 (Reeve, Vol. III, Bk. 2. Chap. x [pp. 265-7].)

l-l
40,59 establishes

[*]
Reeve, Vol. III, pp. 272, 271-2; Tocqueville, Vol. III, p. 211, 210-11.

m-m
Source they have now] 40 they have

n-n
40 (Reeve, Vol. III, Bk. 2. Chap. xiii [pp. 278-82].)

o
40 it is,

p-p
40 that

[*]
Reeve, Vol. II, pp. 153-4; Tocqueville, Vol. II, pp. 144-5.

[†]
Reeve, Vol. II, p. 154; Tocqueville, Vol. II, p. 145.

[‡]
Reeve, Vol. II, p. 267; Tocqueville, Vol. II, p. 254.

q
Source the interests of the] 40 the

r-r
Source,40 olden

s-s
40 (Reeve, Vol. IV, Chap. iii [pp. 341-4].)

t-t
40,59 had

u-u
40 democracy

v-v
40 contemporary

w-w
40 go-ahead spirit

x-x
40 or [printer’s error in 40; corrected in ink by JSM in Somerville
College copy]

y-y
40 seem

[*]
Reeve, Vol. III, p. 100; Tocqueville, Vol. III, p. 78.

[*]
See Francis Bacon. Of the Dignity and Advancement of Learning, in Works,
ed. James Spedding, Robert Ellis, and Douglas Heath, 14 vols. (London:
Longman, 1857-74), Vol. V, p. 77.

z-z
40 household; but

a-a
40 perpetuity

b-b
40 Democracy

c-c
40 result [printer’s error?]

*
On this account, among others we think M. de Tocqueville right in the
great importance he attaches to the study of Greek and Roman literature:
not as being without faults, but as having the contrary faults to those
of our own day. Not only do those literatures furnish dexamplesd of high
finish and perfection in workmanship, to correct the slovenly habits of
modern hasty writing, but they exhibit, in the military and agricultural
commonwealths of antiquity, precisely that order of virtues in which a
commercial society is apt to be deficient, and they altogether show
human nature on a grander scale, with less benevolence but more
patriotism, less sentiment but more self-control, if a lower average of
virtue, more striking individual examples of it; fewer small goodnesses,
but more egreatness, and appreciation of greatness, more which tends to
exalt the imagination, and inspire high conceptions of the capabilities
of human nature. If, as every one fmayf see, the want of affinity of
these studies to the modern mind is gradually lowering them in popular
estimation, this is but a confirmation of the need of them, and renders
it more incumbent upon those who have the power, to do their utmost
towards preventing their decline. [See Reeve, Vol. III, pp. 124-8,
Tocqueville, Vol. III, pp. 97-100.]

d-d
40 models

e
40 of

f-f
40 must

g-g
40 preserving

h
40 ultimate

i-i
40 man

[*]
See François Guizot. Cours d’histoire moderne Histoire generale de la
civilisation en Europe, deputs, la chute de l’empire romain jusqu’à la
révolution française (Paris: Pichon and Didier, 1828), 2e lecon, pp.
3ff.

j-j
+59,67

k-k
40 necessity

l-l
40 slightly [printer’s error?]

m-m
40 to

n-n
40 here [printer’s error?]

o
40 almost as

[*]
See 9 George IV, c. 60 (1828).

p-p
40 American institutions

q-q
204+59,67

[*]
2 vols, Paris: Beck, 1843.

[†]
J. S. Mill, “Duveyrier’s Political Views of French Affairs,” Edinburgh
Review, LXXXIII (Apr., 1846), 453-74. The quoted passage, which runs to
the end of this article, is from pp. 462-6.

[*]
See “Report on the Organisation of the Permanent Civil Service.”
Parliamentary Papers, 1854, XXVII, 1-31.

r-r
-46

[†]
Translated from Charles Duvevrier, La Patrie dans ves rapports avec la
situation politique (Paris Guyot, 1842), p. 12.

s-s
+67

t-t
46 antécédens

u-u
46 Representative Assemblies

v-v
46 States

w-w
46 Representative Governments

[*]
See “Report on the Organisation of the Permanent Civil Service, together
with a letter from the Rev. B. Jowett,” Parliamentary Papers, 1854,
XXVII, 1-31. The “Report” is by Sir Stafford Northcote and Sir Charles
Trevelyan.

[*]
See the comment by Lord Monteagle in Parliamentary Debates, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 131, col. 650 (13 March, 1854).

[*]
See Jowett’s letter in “Report on the Organisation of the Permanent
Civil Service,” pp. 24-31, reprinted below as Appendix C.

[†]
For the editorial footnote that appeared at this point, see App. C
below, pp. 655-6.

[‡]
See Jowett’s letter, p. 25; App. C, p. 655.

a-a
591,592 government

[*]
See Tocqueville, De la Démocratie en Amérique, Vol. II. p. 142.

b-b
591, 592 through

c-c
591,592 Traite [this reference is mistaken Comte’s Système is the work
intended]

[*]
Systeme de politique positive, ou Traité de sociologie instituant la
Religion de l’humanite, 4 vols. (Paris: Mathias, 1851-54).

*
These words had scarcely been written, when, as if to give them an
emphatic contradiction, occurred the Government Press Prosecutions of
1858. That illjudged interference with the liberty of public discussion
has not, however, induced me to alter a single word in the text, nor has
it at all weakened my conviction that, moments of panic excepted, the
era of pains and penalties for political discussion has, in our own
country, passed away. For, in the first place, the prosecutions were not
persisted in, and, in the second, they were never, properly speaking,
political prosecutions. The offence charged was not that of criticising
institutions, or the acts or persons of rulers, but of circulating what
was deemed an immoral doctrine, the lawfulness of Tyrannicide.

If the arguments of the present chapter are of any validity, there ought
to exist the fullest liberty of professing and discussing, as a matter
of ethical conviction, any doctrine, however immoral it may be
considered. It would, therefore, be irrelevant and out of place to
examine here, whether the doctrine of Tyrannicide deserves that title. I
shall content myself with saying that the subject has been at all times
one of the open questions of morals; that the act of a private citizen
in striking down a criminal, who, by raising himself above the law, has
placed himself beyond the reach of legal punishment or control, has been
accounted by whole nations, and by some of the best and wisest of men,
not a crime, but an act of exalted virtue: and that, right or wrong, it
is not of the nature of assassination, but of civil war. As such, I hold
that the instigation to it, in a specific case, may be a proper subject
of punishment, but only if an overt act has followed, and at least a
probable connexion can be established between the act and the
instigation. Even then, it is not a foreign government, but the very
government assailed, which alone, in the exercise of self-defence, can
legitimately punish attacks directed against its own existence.

a-a
591, 592 so [printer’s error?]

[*]
Thomas Carlvle, “Memoirs of the Life of Scott.” London and Westminster
Review, VI & XXVIII (Jan., 1838), 315.

b-b
591, 592, 64 “the truth,”

[*]
See Dante, Inferno, Canto IV, 1.131.

[†]
Plato, Apology, in Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phaedo, Phaedrus (Greek
and English), trans. H. N. Fowler (London: Heinemann: New York:
Macmillan, 1914), p. 90 (24b-c). The accuser was Meletus.

[*]
Caiaphas: see Matthew, 26:65.

[†]
See Acts, 7:58-8:4.

[*]
See Boswell, Life of Johnson, Vol. II, p. 250 (7 May, 1773), cf. Vol.
IV, p. 12 (1780).

[*]
See Demosthenes. “Against Timocrates,” in Demosthenes against Meidias,
Androtion, Aristocrates, Timocrates, Aristogeiton (Greek and English),
trans. J. H. Vince (London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1935), p. 463 (xxiv, 139).

*
Thomas Pooley, Bodmin Assizes, July 31, 1857. In December following, he
received a free pardon from the Crown.

†
George Jacob Holyoake, August 17, 1857; Edward Truelove, July, 1857.

‡
Baron de Gleichen, Marlborough-street Police Court, August 4, 1857.

*
Ample warning may be drawn from the large infusion of the passions of a
persecutor, which mingled with the general display of the worst parts of
our national character on the occasion of the Sepoy insurrection. The
ravings of fanatics or charlatans from the pulpit may be unworthy of
notice, but the heads of the Evangelical party have announced as their
principle for the government of Hindoos and Mahomedans, that no schools
be supported by public money in which the Bible is not taught, and by
necessary consequence that no public employment be given to any but real
or pretended Christians. An Under-Secretary of State [William N.
Massey], in a speech delivered to his constituents on the 12th of
November, 1857, is reported to have said: “Toleration of their faith”
(the faith of a hundred millions of British subjects), “the superstition
which they called religion, by the British Government, had had the
effect of retarding the ascendancy of the British name, and preventing
the salutary growth of Christianity. . . . Toleration was the great
corner-stone of the religious liberties of this country: but do not let
them abuse that precious word toleration. As he understood it, it meant
the complete liberty to all, freedom of worship, among Christians, who
worshipped upon the same foundation. It meant toleration of all sects
and denominations of Christians who believed in the one mediation.” [See
The Times, 14 Nov., 1857, p. 4.] I desire to call attention to the fact,
that a man who has been deemed fit to fill a high office in the
government of this country, under a liberal Ministry, maintains the
doctrine that all who do not believe in the divinity of Christ are
beyond the pale of toleration. Who, after this imbecile display, can
indulge the illusion that religious persecution has passed away, never
to return?

c-c
591, 592 genuine [printer’s error?]

d-d
591, 592, 64 Where

[*]
Demosthenes.

[*]
See, respectively, Luke, 6.20-3 (cf. Matthew, 5:3ff.), and Matthew,
19:24, 7:1, 5:34 (cf. James, 5:12), 19:19, 5:40, 6:34, 19:21

[†]
See Tertullian, Apology (Latin and English), trans. T. R. Glover
(London: Heinemann: New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1931), p. 177 (xxxix, 7).

[*]
See Cicero, Letters to Atticus (Latin and English), trans. E. O.
Winstedt, 3 vols. (London: Heinemann; New York: Macmillan, 1912), Vol.
III, p. 230 (xiv. 9).

e-e
591, 592 is it

[*]
See, e.g., Colossians, 3:22-4:1.

[*]
The passage is not in the Koran, but see Charles Hamilton, The Hedàya or
Guide: A Commentary on the Mussulman Laws, 4 vols. (London: Bensley,
1791), Vol. II, p. 615.

f-f
591, 592 interest

a
Source, 591, 592 a

*
The Sphere and Duties of Government, from the German of Baron Wilhelm
von Humboldt, pp. 11, 13.

b-b
591, 592 Self-will

c-c
591, 592 Obedience

d-d
591, 592 That

e-e
591, 592 being

*
[John] Sterling’s Essays, [“Simonides,” in Essays and Tales, ed. Julius
Charles Hare, 2 vols. (London: Parker, 1848), Vol. I, p. 190.]

f-f
591, 592 Individuality

[*]
Undoubtedly a reference to Thomas Carlyle, On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and
the Heroic in History (London: Fraser, 1841).

g-g
591, 592 existences

*
There is something both contemptible and frightful in the sort of
evidence on which, of late years, any person can be judicially declared
unfit for the management of his affairs; and after his death, his
disposal of his property can be set aside, if there is enough of it to
pay the expenses of litigation—which are charged on the property itself.
All the minute details of his daily life are pried into, and whatever is
found which, seen through the medium of the perceiving and describing
faculties of the lowest of the low, bears an appearance unlike absolute
commonplace, is laid before the jury as evidence of insanity, and often
with success; the jurors being little, if at all, less vulgar and
ignorant than the witnesses; while the judges, with that extraordinary
want of knowledge of human nature and life which continually astonishes
us in English lawyers, often help to mislead them. These trials speak
volumes as to the state of feeling and opinion among the vulgar with
regard to human liberty. So far from setting any value on
individuality—so far from respecting the hrighth of each individual to
act, in things indifferent, as seems good to his own judgment and
inclinations, judges and juries cannot even conceive that a person in a
state of sanity can desire such freedom. In former days, when it was
proposed to burn atheists, charitable people used to suggest putting
them in a mad-house instead: it would be nothing surprising now-a-days
were we to see this done, and the doers applauding themselves, because,
instead of persecuting for religion, they had adopted so humane and
Christian a mode of treating these unfortunates, not without a silent
satisfaction at their having thereby obtained their deserts.

h-h
591, 592 rights

i-i
591, 592 that

j-j
591, 592 in

[*]
See Alexis de Tocqueville, L’Ancien regime (Paris: Lévy, 1856), p. 119.

[†]
See above, p. 261.

[*]
See George Lillo, The London Merchant or, the History of George Barnwell
(London: Gray, 1731).

*
The case of the Bombay Parsees is a curious instance in point. When this
industrious and enterprising tribe, the descendants of the Persian
fire-worshippers, flying from their native country before the Caliphs,
arrived in Western India, they were admitted to toleration by the Hindoo
sovereigns, on condition of not eating beef. When those regions
afterwards fell under the dominion of Mahomedan conquerors, the Parsees
obtained from them a continuance of indulgence, on condition of
refraining from pork. What was at first obedience to authority became a
second nature, and the Parsees to this day abstain both from beef and
pork. Though not required by their religion, the double abstinence has
had time to grow into a custom of their tribe: and custom, in the East,
is a religion.

a-a
591, 592 proposed

[*]
See “Lord Stanley, M.P., and The United Kingdom Alliance,” The Times, 2
Oct., 1856, pp. 9-10.

[*]
Samuel Pope, letter to Lord Stanley, ibid., p. 9.

[*]
See, e.g., 13 & 14 Victoria, c. 23 (1850).

[†]
Tacitus, The Annals, Vol. I, p. 368 (I, lxxiii).

[*]
Joseph Smith.

a-a
591,592 punishments

[*]
See 14 & 15 Victoria, c. 13 (1851).

[*]
See, e.g., An Introductory View of the Rationale of Evidence, in Works,
Vol. VI, p. 60.

b-b
591 state

c-c
591,592 is

d-d
591 arguments; I

[*]
See p. 226 above.

[*]
The Sphere and Duties of Government, p. 34.

e-e
591,592 another

f-f
591 class

g-g
591,592 class

h-h
591,592 state

i-i
591,592 state

[*]
See The Sphere and Duties of Government, p. 123.

j-j
591,592 state

k-k
591,592 state

[*]
See, e.g., J. S. Mill, “Reform of the Civil Service.” pp. 205-11 above.

l
591,592 is

m-m
591,592 tribunal


