Whately’s Elements of Logic

“a very slow progress towards popularity,” says Dr. Whately in his
Preface, “is the utmost that can be expected for such a treatise as I
have endeavoured to make the present.” [P. xxxvi.] In these times, in
which the very thought of writing for posterity seems to be abandoned—in
which immediate reputation and immediate profit appear to be the sole
ends of authorship, instead of usefulness and permanent fame; this
readiness on the part of an author to wait for popularity, is of itself
a title to praise.

We believe, however, that even the immediate success of Dr. Whately’s
work has exceeded the anticipations which the author, judging from the
strong prejudices it had to encounter, deemed himself entitled to form.
Nor is this surprising. We have long been convinced, that the time was
come when a work containing a clear exposition of the principles of the
Syllogistic Logic, and vindicating it against the contemptuous sarcasms
of some modern metaphysicians, might make its appearance with almost a
certainty of success. The authority of the Scotch philosophers (as Dr.
Reid and his followers are termed), whose writings have been for the
last fifty years the great stronghold of the enemies of Logic, has been
for some time on the decline; and has at last fallen so low, that
nothing, save the non-appearance of any worthy antagonist in the field
of controversy, enables them to maintain any ground in public
estimation. And there are various signs apparent to keen observers,
shewing that a reaction has commenced in favour of what is really
valuable in the ancient philosophy, and that the time when the whole of
it could be dismissed with indiscriminate contempt, is at an end. Logic,
as it is by far the most important branch of that philosophy, is
accordingly recovering its proper rank the most rapidly; but such a work
as that of Dr. Whately was still required, to direct, as well as
stimulate, the study of that invaluable science, in the cultivation of
which we believe it is very generally felt to have already constituted
an æra.

Were we, however, required to state precisely wherein we think that the
merit of Dr. Whately more peculiarly consists, we should say of him
(what has been said of another writer, and on another subject), that he
has rather written excellently concerning logic, than expounded in the
best possible manner the science itself. His vindication of the utility
of logic is conclusive: his explanation of its distinguishing character
and peculiar objects, of Edition: current; Page: [4] the purposes to
which it is and is not applicable, and the mode of its application,
leave scarcely any thing to be desired: on incidental topics his
observations are generally just, and not unfrequently original; but,
considering his work as what it professes to be, an exposition of the
Elements of Logic, it is impossible not to wish that it had contained a
clearer explanation, and a fuller development, of several very important
topics. We trust that it may be permitted to us to say thus much,
without incurring the imputation of being wanting in deference to an
author whom we so highly esteem. The whole tenor of our observations
will, we hope, protect us from the suspicion of not setting a
sufficiently high value upon this important contribution to philosophy,
and will sufficiently distinguish us from those carping critics, who,
while they freely allow to an author in generals, all the merit he can
claim, shew by their whole tone and manner when they descend to
particulars, that the most trifling defect has occupied a larger place
in their thoughts than all the excellencies which they have so liberally
conceded to him. If we hazard any suggestions for the improvement of the
work, they are offered rather to the author himself than to the public.
If we make any observations tending to shew what Dr. Whately has failed
of doing, they will be such as we cannot expect to be even understood by
any who have not gone through all the processes of thought necessary for
completely mastering, and perfectly appreciating, the whole of what he
has done. If we presume to judge the author’s ideas, we are willing to
take him for the judge of ours; and we shall be more than satisfied if
he should derive one hundredth part of the instruction from our
criticism, which we have received from his work.

Before we enter into a minute examination of Dr. Whately’s book, we
shall premise a few remarks on the importance of Logic, and the causes
which may account for the little cultivation of that branch of knowledge
in modern times. It will be seen, that in these observations we have
borrowed largely from our author, although our ideas have not flowed
precisely in the same channel with his.

Dr. Whately establishes in his preface the utility of the syllogistic
philosophy, by the following argument à priori:

If it were inquired what is to be regarded as the most appropriate
intellectual occupation of man, as man, what would be the answer? The
statesman is engaged with political affairs; the soldier with military;
the mathematician with the properties of numbers and magnitudes; the
merchant with commercial concerns, &c.; but in what are all and each of
these employed? Evidently in Reasoning. They are all occupied in
deducing, well or ill, conclusions from premises, each concerning the
subject of his own particular business. If, therefore, it be found that
the process going on daily in each of so many different minds is, in any
respect, the same, and if the principles on which it is conducted can be
reduced to a regular system, and if rules can be deduced from that
system for the better conducting of the process, Edition: current; Page:
[5] then, it can hardly be denied that such a system and such rules must
be especially worthy the attention, not of the members of this or that
profession merely, but of every one who is desirous of possessing a
cultivated mind. To understand the theory of that which is the
appropriate intellectual occupation of man in general, and to learn to
do that well, which every one will and must do, whether well or ill, may
surely be considered as an essential part of a liberal education.

(Pp. x-xi.)

But, unfortunately for logic, men do not commonly form their opinion of
the utility of any branch of knowledge, from such general
considerations. They judge of its value chiefly from the need which they
find of it, as measured by the disadvantages which they feel themselves
to labour under from ignorance of it. But it is a peculiarity of logic,
that it is impossible any man should ever discover its utility in this
way, since the benefit which it affords consists in being freed from a
defect, which no man who possesses it ever knows that he possesses.
Every man knows what he loses by being ignorant of astronomy, because he
feels his inability to determine a latitude, or foretel an eclipse. Men
in general are perfectly well aware that they cannot do these things,
and consequently no one ever doubted that there was a science of
astronomy; just as no man can possibly doubt the necessity of a rule for
extracting the cube-root, because no man can persuade himself that he
knows how to extract the cube-root when he does not. But men may easily
persuade themselves that they are able to reason although they are not;
because the faculty which they want, is that by which alone they could
detect the want of it. The proof, à posteriori, of a man’s inability to
reason, would be, that he is deceived by inconclusive arguments; and
this may be evidence to others that he stands in need of logic, but it
can be no evidence to him. Hence it is, that they who are ignorant of
logic, never can be made, by any efforts, to comprehend its utility.
They either reason correctly without it, or they do not: if they do,
they are in no need of it; and as for those who reason incorrectly for
want of it, they never find out their deficiency until it is removed.

It is not wonderful, therefore, that the doctrine of the syllogism
should number among its detractors all who are ignorant of it. But to
these must, we are sorry to say, be added, some who are, and many more
who fancy themselves, acquainted with it.

The impugners of the school logic, as they term it, may be divided into
two classes. The first class consists of men not untinctured with
philosophy, including even some writers of considerable eminence in the
science of mind; men who are more or less acquainted with the principles
of the system, so far at least as to have a general, though often by no
means an accurate, conception of its nature and object. These, being
persons of cultivated and inquiring minds, who have known what it is to
doubt, and to discover themselves in error, and have learned not to
repose an unlimited Edition: current; Page: [6] confidence in the
unassisted powers of their own minds, are in general sufficiently
impressed with the utility of rules to direct the mind in the
investigation of truth. They object to the rules of the syllogistic
logic as not effecting that end; they maintain, not that logic is
useless, but that the doctrine of the syllogism is not logic; and they
talk in high-flown language, not always conveying very precise ideas, of
a supposed system of inductive logic, which is to supersede the
syllogistic, and really to accomplish still more than the other even
attempts.

It is against the objections of these philosophers, that our author’s
defence of the Aristotelian logic is mainly directed. We apprehend,
however, that they are chiefly formidable, by the countenance which they
afford to another and a much larger class of the enemies of the science.
This second class consists of those who are entirely ignorant of it, and
consequently do not reject it under the idea that the rules which it
gives are not the best possible, but that no rules, for any such
purpose, are necessary at all. If these persons were to observe
carefully, and state candidly, what passes in their minds when they
bring in their verdict of inutility against the syllogistic system,
their account of their own train of ideas would probably amount to
this—that it is impossible a knowledge of logic can be of any use,
seeing that they themselves do so well without it; nor could they ever
perceive that the men who had studied logic reasoned better than their
neighbours:—forgetting, that in the very supposition of the utility of
logic it is implied that they themselves, who have not studied it, are
not, in all cases, competent judges of good reasoning; forgetting, too,
that in nine cases out of ten, the evidence on which they pronounce
either a logician or another man guilty of bad reasoning is the
nonconformity of his conclusions with theirs; which is, to say the
least, just as likely to be the effect of bad reasoning on their side,
as on his.

The following excellent passage from Dr. Whately’s preface is addressed
particularly to this class of the impugners of logic, and may be read by
them with great profit:

Many who allow the use of systematic principles in other things are
accustomed to cry up Common-Sense as the sufficient and only safe guide
in Reasoning. Now by Common-Sense is meant, I apprehend (when the term
is used with any distinct meaning), an exercise of the judgment unaided
by any Art or system of rules; such as we must necessarily employ in
numberless cases of daily occurrence; in which, having no established
principles to guide us, no line of procedure, as it were, distinctly
chalked out, we must needs act on the best extemporaneous conjectures we
can form. He who is eminently skilful in doing this, is said to possess
a superior degree of Common-Sense. But that Common-Sense is only our
second-best guide—that the rules of Art, if judiciously framed, are
always desirable when they can be had, is an assertion, for the truth of
which I may appeal to the testimony of Mankind in general; which is so
much the more valuable, inasmuch as it may be Edition: current; Page:
[7] accounted the testimony of adversaries. For the generality have a
strong predilection in favour of Common-Sense, except in those points in
which they respectively possess the knowledge of a system of rules; but
in these points they deride any one who trusts to unaided Common-Sense.
A sailor, e.g. will perhaps despise the pretensions of medical men, and
prefer treating a disease by Common-Sense; but he would ridicule the
proposal of navigating a ship by Common-Sense, without regard to the
maxims of nautical art. A physician, again, will, perhaps, contemn
Systems of Political Economy, of Logic, or Metaphysics, and insist on
the superior wisdom of trusting to Common-Sense in such matters; but he
never would approve of trusting to Common-Sense in the treatment of
diseases. Neither, again, would the architect recommend a reliance on
Common-Sense alone in building, nor the musician in music, to the
neglect of those systems of rules, which, in their respective arts, have
been deduced from scientific reasoning aided by experience. And the
Induction might be extended to every department of practice. Since,
therefore, each gives the preference to unassisted Common-Sense only in
those cases where he himself has nothing else to trust to, and
invariably resorts to the rules of art wherever he possesses the
knowledge of them, it is plain that mankind universally bear their
testimony, though unconsciously and often unwillingly, to the
preferableness of systematic knowledge to conjectural judgments.

(Pp. xii-xiv.)

Upon the other and more philosophical class of objectors, Dr. Whately’s
attacks are far more frequent; indeed, a running fire is kept up with
them through the whole of the work. We shall indulge ourselves with one
quotation, which admits of a more easy separation from the context than
any of the numerous other passages of a similar tendency. It occurs near
the beginning of the work, and abounds in instructive observations with
regard to the nature and objects of the science:

Logic has usually been considered by these objectors as professing to
furnish a peculiar method of reasoning, instead of a method of analyzing
that mental process which must invariably take place in all correct
reasoning: and accordingly they have contrasted the ordinary mode of
reasoning with the syllogistic, and have brought forward with an air of
triumph the argumentative skill of many who never learned the system; a
mistake no less gross than if any one should regard Grammar as a
peculiar Language, and should contend against its utility, on the ground
that many speak correctly who never studied the principles of Grammar.
For Logic, which is, as it were, the Grammar of Reasoning, does not
bring forward the regular syllogism as a distinct mode of argumentation,
designed to be substituted for any other mode; but as the form to which
all correct reasoning may be ultimately reduced; and which,
consequently, serves the purpose (when we are employing Logic as an art)
of a test to try the validity of any argument; in the same manner as by
chemical analysis we develope and submit to a distinct examination the
elements of which any compound body is composed, and are thus enabled to
detect any latent sophistication and impurity.

Complaints have also been made, that logic leaves untouched the greatest
difficulties, and those which are the sources of the chief errors in
reasoning; viz. the ambiguity, or indistinctness of Terms, and the
doubts respecting the degrees of evidence in various Propositions: an
objection which is not to be removed by any such attempt as that of
Watts, to lay down “rules for forming clear ideas, and for Edition:
current; Page: [8] guiding the judgment;”[*] but by replying that no art
is to be censured for not teaching more than falls within its province,
and indeed more than can be taught by any conceivable art. Such a system
of universal knowledge as should instruct us in the full meaning or
meanings of every term, and the truth or falsity—certainty or
uncertainty—of every proposition, thus superseding all other studies, it
is most unphilosophical to expect, or even to imagine. And to find fault
with Logic for not performing this, is as if one should object to the
science of Optics for not giving sight to the blind; or as if (like the
man of whom Warburton tells a story in his Div. Leg.) one should
complain of a reading-glass for being of no service to a person who had
never learned to read.[†]

In fact, the difficulties and errors above alluded to are not in the
process of Reasoning itself (which alone is the appropriate province of
logic) but in the subject-matter about which it is employed. This
process will have been correctly conducted if it have conformed to the
logical rules, which preclude the possibility of any error creeping in
between the principles from which we are arguing, and the conclusions we
deduce from them. But still that conclusion may be false, if the
principles we start from are so. In like manner, no arithmetical skill
will secure a correct result to a calculation, unless the data are
correct from which we calculate: nor does any one, on that account,
undervalue Arithmetic; and yet the objection against logic rests on no
better foundation.

There is, in fact, a striking analogy in this respect between the two
sciences. All numbers (which are the subject of arithmetic) must be
numbers of some things, whether coins, persons, measures, or any thing
else; but to introduce into the science any notice of the things
respecting which calculations are made, would be evidently irrelevant,
and would destroy its scientific character: we proceed therefore with
arbitrary signs respecting numbers in the abstract. So, also, does Logic
pronounce on the validity of a regularly-constructed argument, equally
well, though arbitrary symbols may have been substituted for the terms;
and, consequently, without any regard to the things signified by those
terms. And the possibility of doing this (though the employment of such
arbitrary symbols has been absurdly objected to, even by writers who
understood not only Arithmetic but Algebra) is a proof of the strictly
scientific character of the system.

(Pp. 11-14.)

In the second paragraph of this passage, otherwise so remarkable both
for precision of thought and felicity of illustration, Dr. Whately
hardly does justice to the science of which he has constituted himself
the defender. He says, with truth, that it is most unreasonable to
quarrel with logic for not instructing us in the meaning of every term,
and the truth or falsity, certainty or uncertainty, of every proposition
which we have occasion to employ in our reasonings, since this is, in
each case, the business of the particular science to which the
subject-matter of the argument belongs, and is much more than can
possibly be effected by any single science. But this remark, though
just, scarcely conveys an adequate idea of the extreme Edition: current;
Page: [9] futility of the objection, since the fact is, that the
syllogistic logic really does all that can be done by any one science,
towards the above end; inasmuch as the analysis, to which it subjects
every process of reasoning, affords the readiest and the most certain
means by which a latent ambiguity in any of the terms employed, or the
tacit assumption of any false or doubtful proposition, can be detected.
Common observation verifies this fact; since the appellation of an
expert logician seems, by the usage of language, peculiarly appropriated
to those who are thought to be eminently skilful in the detection of
such fallacies; which seems to shew that mankind in general have
observed (what indeed is easy enough of observation), that they who have
studied logic, and who are familiar with its practical application, are
less liable than other men to be imposed upon by an assumption or an
ambiguity.

With regard to those who maintain, that to perform the logical analysis
of an argument, in the manner pointed out by the doctrine of the
syllogism, is not the best means of discovering whether it contain a
flaw; it may fairly be demanded of them, first, whether they imagine,
that, when an argument is inconclusive, its inconclusiveness is always
apparent at the first glance? When they answer, as they must necessarily
do, that it is not (because otherwise people could never be deceived by
inconclusive arguments), and that the fallacy is often visible only upon
a close inspection, it will be proper to ask them, whether they intend
that it should be inspected in the lump, or piecemeal;—all at once, or
step by step, beginning with the first step, and proceeding onward to
the last? We imagine there is no one who would not reply, that this last
mode comes nearest to his idea of a close inspection. It seems then that
even according to the objectors, an analysis of the argument is
requisite, in order to try its validity; but that for the performance of
this analysis, common-sense, as they term it, is sufficient. Let us
however press these disputants a step further, and ask them in what
manner common-sense proceeds to analyse an argument, in order to form a
judgment whether it is sound or fallacious. If they had any distinct
ideas on the subject, they would probably answer, that it proceeds by
first separating the propositions which contribute to the establishment
of the conclusion (in common language, those which are essential to the
argument) from all irrelevant propositions with which they may happen to
be mixed up; next, by stating in words, and explicitly, all
propositions, also essential to the argument, which may have been
assumed tacitly, instead of being declared verbally; thirdly, (having
thus effected the separation and enumeration of the premises of the
argument), by arranging all these propositions in that order, which (so
strongly does ordinary language corroborate our view of the case) is
termed their logical order; that is to say, by bringing every
conclusion, and the premises from which it is deduced, close together,
and Edition: current; Page: [10] taking care that the step by which the
truth of a proposition is established, shall precede all those in which
that proposition is made use of as a premiss for the establishment of
other propositions: when all this is done, then, they will tell you, a
child could judge of the correctness or fallacy of the argument.
Possibly so: but what is all this? It is neither more nor less than to
perform the logical analysis of the argument. When all is done which has
been here supposed, the argument is actually reduced to a series of
syllogisms: so that the all-sufficiency of common-sense amounts only to
this, that, if the man of common-sense makes use of the same means which
logic supplies, he may attain the same end. This is true, certainly; but
will he do so? and, if he should attempt it, which of the two is most
likely to perform the analysis correctly—the man who does it by rule, or
the man who does it by guess; the man who knows the principle of the
operation which he is performing, or the man who trusts to
extemporaneous sagacity alone?

Had the philosophers who treated with so much contempt the idea of
trying the validity of an argument by resolving it into a series of
syllogisms, been aware that there is no other way in which its validity
can be tried, and that this, and no other, is the process actually
performed, so far as is found necessary for the purpose, whenever a
fallacy in argument is discovered and pointed out, they would probably
have spared some portion of the ridicule which they have heaped upon the
syllogistic theory. We do not, of course, mean to assert, that the
analysis is always carried to its utmost limit; that every step in a
ratiocination is set forth at full length; every implied assertion laid
down, which, if it were untrue, would vitiate the argument; every
syllogism formally resolved into its two premises and its conclusion:
although some of the impugners of logic have supposed, absurdly enough,
that all this would be necessary if the syllogistic theory were true:
and, indeed, all this would be necessary, were it not that, in practice,
the fallacy almost always becomes manifest long before the analysis has
been carried to this ultimate point. As near an approximation to the
syllogistic form as is employed in mathematics (which scarcely differs
more from a complete series of syllogisms than that abridged form of
syllogistic argumentation, known to logicians by the name of a Sorites)
is commonly sufficient. But whatever portion of the analysis it is found
necessary to perform, is performed upon syllogistic principles; and it
would be a singular specimen of argumentation, to contend that the rules
of logic do not conduce to the correct performance of a part of the
operation, because they conduce also to the performance of the whole.
Dr. Whately has aptly compared the logical analysis of a fallacious
argument to the chemical analysis of an adulterated mixture [p. 31]:—to
pursue this illustration somewhat further;—although the substance under
an analysis of the latter description is certainly a compound of some of
the primary elements, or Edition: current; Page: [11] simple substances,
as oxygen, carbon, &c.; and, although its bad qualities are undoubtedly
to be ascribed to the presence, either of a wrong element, or of some
element in an improper proportion,—it is seldom necessary, for the
purpose of detecting the adulteration, to effect the complete separation
of all these primary ingredients, because the undue admixture generally
becomes manifest, and the adventitious particles are separated at a much
earlier stage of the proceeding. And yet, nobody would pretend that a
man unacquainted with the properties of simple substances would be
perfectly capable of performing such an analysis, or that the knowledge
of the ultimate elements of bodies was of no service to the chemist. The
same observations apply, mutato nomine, to the logician, and the
syllogism.

Had the considerations which we have now adduced, suggested themselves
to Mr. Dugald Stewart and others, those writers would scarcely have
thought it a sufficient refutation of the syllogistic theory, to say
(what indeed is very true), that if we were habitually to employ, in
stating an argument, those forms which are only useful when it is to be
scrutinized, the complexity of the expression, by lengthening the
process, and distracting the attention, would cause more fallacies than
it would prevent.[*] As opposite arguments not unfrequently converge to
the same conclusion, other men, or the same men at other times, have
pronounced the syllogism useless on the contrary ground, viz. because a
fallacious argument, exhibited as logicians exhibit it, in the form of a
syllogism, is so palpably fallacious as to deceive nobody. This we may
admit: the difficulty is over, when the argument is reduced to that
form. But how are we taught to bring it into that form? By logic surely:
and what higher compliment can be paid to the doctrine of the syllogism,
than to say, that the same fallacy, in the form of a syllogism, deceives
nobody, which “may deceive half the world if diluted in a quarto
volume.”*

Fallacious reasonings, [says Dr. Whately,] may be compared to a
perplexed and entangled mass of accounts, which it requires much
sagacity and close attention to clear up, and display in a regular and
intelligible form; though when this is once accomplished, the whole
appears so perfectly simple, that the unthinking are apt to undervalue
the skill and pains which have been employed upon it.

(Ibid.)

We agree with Dr. Whately in ascribing the little esteem, in which the
doctrine of the syllogism has been held by modern metaphysicians, to its
being confounded with the absurdities of the schoolmen; who certainly
dressed up much elaborate trifling in syllogistic forms, and deduced, by
Edition: current; Page: [12] reasoning, and consequently by syllogism,
from false premises, many very absurd conclusions. Modern philosophers,
perceiving this, fancied that it was produced by the employment of the
syllogism in lieu of induction; and concluded that, in order to avoid
similar errors, it was necessary to discard the syllogism, which they
thought was one method of reasoning, and confine ourselves to induction,
which they imagined was another. All this while, the truth was, that the
schoolmen not only did not neglect induction, but entertained a far more
accurate and certainly a more distinct conception of the difference
between its function and that of syllogism, than seems to have been
entertained by any philosopher who has succeeded them. They saw clearly
that the process of philosophizing consisted of two parts; the
ascertainment of premises, and the deduction of conclusions. They knew
that the rules of the syllogism concerned only the second part of the
business (which alone is properly called Reasoning), and could only
prevent them from drawing any conclusions which their premises did not
warrant, but could not furnish any test of the truth of those original
premises, which are not deductions from any prior truths. The evidence
of these, which they termed ἀρχαι, principia, was derived from
experience, and the process of the mind in attaining to them was termed
induction. Τὰς μὲν ἀρχὰς τὰς περὶ ἔκατον, ἐμπειριας ἐτὶ παραϕου̑ναι, are
the words of Aristotle himself:* and both his Analytica Priora and
Posteriora[*] are full of proofs, that he considered experience, in
other words, induction, to be the ultimate foundation of all knowledge:
the ἀρχαι or first principles of every science being ascertained by
induction, and all other truths being deduced from them.

That this should have been overlooked by those who style themselves the
inductive philosophers of modern times, is the more surprising, inasmuch
as it did not escape the observation of their prototype and idol, Lord
Bacon. That great writer, whom it is now fashionable to style the
founder of the inductive philosophy, a title which he himself would have
been the foremost to disclaim, imputes the errors of Aristotle and the
schoolmen, not to their neglecting induction,—for he had read them—but
to their performing it ill. They knew that all knowledge must be
ultimately derived from the observation of nature; but they were bad
observers, and had even (as was remarked by lord Bacon)† fundamentally
wrong ideas with respect Edition: current; Page: [13] to the proper mode
of directing their observations. They consequently generalized on
insufficient evidence, and arrived, by an incorrect induction indeed,
but yet by induction, at general principles, which were not true, but
which, if they had been true, would have warranted all the conclusions
which they deduced from them. The merit, therefore, of Bacon, did not
consist in teaching mankind to employ induction instead of syllogism,
but in pointing out to them the insufficiency of the mode of induction
which they had hitherto relied on, and communicating some useful hints
for the formation of a better. Since his time, a more efficacious mode
of interrogating nature (to borrow a happy expression of his own)[*] has
established, that throughout some of the most extensive departments of
natural philosophy, there does not exist that sort of connexion between
different truths, which would enable us to deduce one of them from
another as the schoolmen attempted to do.* We cannot collect the
ductility or specific gravity of a body which we have never seen, from
the mere knowledge of its chemical composition, as we can deduce all the
other properties of a triangle from that of having three sides. But we
are not even now entitled to blame the schoolmen, as Dr. Whately himself
has done, for “regarding the syllogism as an engine for the
investigation of nature,”† in other words, for applying general
reasoning to the discovery of physical truth; since this is Edition:
current; Page: [14] precisely what we ourselves very properly do,
throughout the vast field of astronomy, and of mechanical philosophy. It
is unnecessary to remind any one who is acquainted with logic, that
since every mathematical demonstration consists of a series of
syllogisms, the application of the syllogism must be at least
coextensive with that of mathematics. Throughout the extensive sciences
just named, modern philosophers have operated (though with more success)
in the very same mode which the schoolmen attempted: they have
ascertained by induction certain very general facts; the laws of motion,
that of gravitation, of the reflection and refraction of light, &c. and
have deduced from these, by a series, sometimes a very long series, of
syllogisms, innumerable conclusions with respect to past, present, and
even future, physical facts. Surely it is time that the practice of
reproaching the schoolmen for doing precisely what we do ourselves,
should cease. The schoolmen erred, not because they overlooked the
necessary limits of that portion of the process of investigating truth,
to which the syllogism is subservient, but because they did not perform
the other and equally necessary part of that process with the same
unrivalled skill, with which, by the aid of logic, they performed that
part of it with which alone logic is conversant.

The province of reasoning in the investigation of truth is immense. It
comprises the whole of the process of investigating mathematical truths,
by far the greater part of the process of investigating the truths of
astronomy, and mechanical philosophy in all its branches, a very large
part in respect of the truths of morals, politics, and the philosophy of
the human mind: to chemistry and physiology alone it has but a limited
application. Upon reasoning depends the correctness of our inferences;
upon induction, the evidence of those truths from which our inferences
are drawn. The philosophers who have spoken in such high terms of the
desirableness of an inductive logic, meaning thereby rules for
performing induction, have said no more than the truth; but the rules of
correct deduction are not less essential, nor is it any objection to the
Aristotelian logic that, professing only to give rules for one of these
necessary operations, it affords no means of dispensing with the other.
An inductive logic would be highly useful as a supplement to the
syllogistic logic, not to supersede it. “A plough,” says Dr. Whately,
“may be a much more ingenious and valuable instrument than a flail, but
it never can be substituted for it” (p. 236). Induction has usually been
performed in a manner so empirical, that it is almost surprising that so
many useful truths should have been ascertained by means of it; but if
our rules of induction were as specific and precise, as all those which
we have hitherto possessed are vague and general, they would not
contribute, in the slightest degree, to the correctness of our
reasoning. The syllogistic logic affords the only rules which can
possibly be of any service to that end. It is, Edition: current; Page:
[15] to use Dr. Whately’s words, not an art of reasoning, but the art of
reasoning; “the logician’s object being, not to lay down principles by
which one may reason, but by which all must reason, even though they are
not distinctly aware of them:—to furnish rules, not which may be
followed with advantage, but which cannot possibly be departed from in
sound reasoning” (p. 22). The syllogism is not “a peculiar method of
reasoning,” but “a method of unfolding and analyzing our reasoning” (p.
21). Syllogistic reasoning is not a kind of reasoning, for all correct
reasoning is syllogistic: and to reason by induction is a recommendation
which implies as thorough a misconception of the meaning of the two
words, as if the advice were, to observe by syllogism.

We shall now attempt a short summary of the contents of Dr. Whately’s
volume, together with such observations as may most effectually display
its merits, and at the same time exhibit plainly one or two
imperfections which we have already glanced at; and which, though
trifling in comparison with the general excellencies of the work,
contribute, nevertheless, to render it both a less clear and a less
perfect exposition of the syllogistic logic, than it might have been
made.

After an Introduction, consisting of a brief history of the science,
with some remarks upon its utility, the most interesting portion of
which we have already extracted, Dr. Whately prepares the reader for the
study of his Compendium of Logic, by what he terms an Analytical Outline
of the Science. This appears to us an extremely happy idea. In
expounding a science which, like logic, professes to teach what are the
parts which go to the composition of any given whole, that may be termed
the synthetical mode of teaching, which commences with the separate
parts, and, after a sufficient explanation of their nature, proceeds to
shew in what manner they must be put together in order to form that
whole, which it is the object of the science to analyse: while that
method, on the other hand, may properly be termed analytical, which
begins at the opposite extreme, examining the whole as it exists in
nature, and, by means of observation and experiment, detecting in that
whole the several parts; thus teaching the science in the very order in
which it must have been originally discovered. The first method, which
begins by exhibiting the simple elements, and makes the learner familiar
with them in their separate state, before any of their combinations are
introduced to his notice, is generally the best adapted for teaching him
the science; but the second is better calculated for persuading him to
learn: because it commences with what is already familiar to him in
actual practice, and, gradually leading him back to first principles,
enables him to perceive, at each step in the analysis, the practical
tendency and application of that step: whereas in the first mode he is
made to go through the whole science before he reaches the point at
which Edition: current; Page: [16] it comes into contact with his own
practice, and, therefore, often fails of perceiving that it has any
practical application at all. We are inclined to ascribe very much of
the unpopularity of logic as a science, to the circumstance, that
writers on the subject have almost universally employed the synthetical
mode of exposition, to the exclusion of the analytical; a practice which
can be advantageously adopted, only where there exists, as in the case
of geometry, a predisposition in favour of the science proposed to be
communicated. So long as the mode in which logic was invariably taught
rendered it necessary to have thoroughly mastered the whole science
before arriving at the evidence of its practical utility, it was,
perhaps, scarcely to be wondered at, that all who did not possess this
perfect knowledge of the subject should hold a science to be useless, of
the usefulness of which the proof had never reached their minds.

This obstacle to the right appreciation of the importance of logic, Dr.
Whately has for ever removed. The masterly sketch which he has given of
the whole science, in the analytical form, previously to entering upon a
more detailed exposition of it in the synthetical order, constitutes one
of the greatest merits of this volume, as an elementary work.

In every instance, [says he,] in which we reason, in the strict sense of
the word, i.e. make use of arguments, whether for the sake of refuting
an adversary, or of conveying instruction, or of satisfying our own
minds on any point, whatever may be the subject we are engaged on, a
certain process takes place in the mind, which is one and the same in
all cases, provided it be correctly conducted.

(P. 18.)

On this important psychological or metaphysical fact, depends the whole
title of logic to be considered as a science; and our author,
accordingly, is at great pains to illustrate it, and to refute the error
(fostered by the prevailing language on the subject) of supposing that
mathematical reasoning, and theological, and metaphysical, and
political, and moral, are so many different kinds of reasoning. Whereas,
in reality, what is different in these different cases is not the mode
of reasoning, but the nature of the premises, or propositions from which
we reason; precisely, as in arithmetic, the process of calculation is
the same, whether the numbers, upon which the calculation is performed,
be numbers of men, of miles, or of pounds.*

In pursuing the supposed investigation, it will be found, that every
conclusion is deduced, in reality, from two other propositions (thence
called Premises); for though one of these may be, and commonly is,
suppressed, it must nevertheless be understood as admitted, as may
easily be made evident by supposing the denial of the suppressed
premiss, which will at once invalidate the argument.—An argument thus
stated regularly and at full length, is called a Syllogism; which,
therefore is evidently not a peculiar kind of argument, but only a
peculiar form of expression, in which every argument may be stated.

(Pp. 23-4.)

Edition: current; Page: [17]
Having advanced so far in the investigation of the subject, as to
ascertain that every conclusion is deduced from two premises, the next
step is, to examine, whether the nature of the premises which are
required to support a given conclusion is subject to any general law.
Pursuing this investigation, Dr. Whately shews, that in one of the
premises, something is always affirmed or denied of a class, in which
class it is affirmed, in the other premiss, that something else is
contained; from which two assertions it is, in every case of correct
reasoning, concluded, that what was so affirmed or denied of the class,
may be affirmed or denied of that which was stated to be comprehended in
the class. As every valid argument may be reduced to this form, the
principle upon which the above conclusion is drawn, and which is termed
by logicians the dictum de omni et nullo, is the universal principle of
all reasoning. It may be stated in the following form, the three
propositions of the syllogism being distinguished by figures.

“1. Any thing whatever, predicated of a whole class,

2. Under which class something else is contained,

3. May be predicated of that which is so contained.” (P. 36.)

Every valid argument is a case of this general principle; every fallacy
is a case which, while it seems to fall under the principle, really does
not.

Having thus analysed every process of reasoning into the propositions of
which it is composed, the next step is the analysis of a proposition
into its two terms, its subject and predicate. And here, from the
inquiry, what predicates are applicable to what subjects, arises the
whole theory of classification, and of general and particular names. But
having already followed our author sufficiently far in his Analytical
Outline, to give an adequate conception of his mode of proceeding, we
shall stop here, particularly as we do not think him quite so successful
in the latter part of the analysis, as in the earlier.

Having thus analysed the process of ratiocination into its simple and
ultimate elements, Dr. Whately commences a fuller exposition of the
science in the inverse order; and this, in contradistinction to his
Analytical Outline, he terms a Synthetical Compendium.[*]

As every argument consists of propositions, and every proposition of
terms, it has been usual with writers on logic, to treat their subject
under three heads, namely, Terms, Propositions, and Syllogism. As this
principle of distribution arises obviously out of the nature of the
subject, Dr. Whately has adopted it; and his Synthetical Compendium
consists of three parts. On the third part, which treats of arguments,
little need be said, except that it is equal, if not superior, to any
other exposition extant, of this branch of the science. The
supplementary account of hypothetical arguments deserves Edition:
current; Page: [18] higher praise; it is almost entirely new:
comparatively little having been done by Aristotle or his followers,
either for reducing the theory of that kind of arguments to fixed
principles, or for devising rules to ensure correctness in the practice.
We do not think by any means so highly of the two introductory parts, on
Terms and Propositions. On these important subjects it appears to us
that Dr. Whately not only has not improved upon the expositions given in
former treatises on logic, but has not even availed himself of all the
useful matter which those works afford.

We shall, before we proceed further, endeavour to give a general
conception of what was done by the Aristotelian logicians in these two
departments of the science.

It is sometimes said, and in a certain sense with truth, that these
philosophers considered Propositions and Terms solely with reference to
their employment in Reasoning; and treated of them, in their books of
logic, no further than was necessary for expounding the doctrine of the
Syllogism. But if by this it be meant, that they laid down no doctrines
respecting terms and propositions, except what were required to enable
them to analyse the process by which conclusions are drawn from
premises, and establish rules for performing that process correctly, we
believe it will be found that this character applies to a small part
only of what is commonly taught in logical treatises under these two
heads. For the mere purposes of the syllogism,—for securing that our
conclusions shall be such as really follow from our premises,—very
little of the theory of terms and propositions is necessary, except the
division of terms into General and Individual, of propositions into
Universal and Particular, Affirmative and Negative; with the rules which
relate to what logicians very inappropriately call the Distribution of
Terms;* to which we may, perhaps, add, the Conversion and Æquipollency
of propositions. This is all that is strictly necessary by way of
introduction to the theory of the syllogism; and it is but just to state
that on all these points Dr. Whately’s exposition is completely
satisfactory.

But the Aristotelian logicians did not stop here, nor confine within
these narrow bounds the dominion of their science. They appear to have
included in their idea of logic, not only the principles of reasoning,
but all the instructions which philosophy could furnish towards the
right employment of words, as an instrument for the investigation of
truth. That principles Edition: current; Page: [19] may be laid down and
rules devised to that end, sufficient in number and importance to
constitute a science, we hold to be indisputable; though we are aware
that in this opinion Dr. Whately does not concur. Whether that science
should be regarded as a part of logic, is a mere question of
nomenclature, and one which common usage has long since decided in the
affirmative. But, however we may decide with respect to the names, it is
in the first two parts of the treatises of the Aristotelian philosophers
on logic, that we find all which they thought it necessary to lay down
with reference to the employment of words, generally, as an instrument
of thought; and in this there was much, which, however it might conduce
to the truth or accurate wording of the premises from which we reason,
contributed nothing to the correctness of the ratiocination itself.

The Aristotelians did not carry this department of what they considered
as logic, to a degree of perfection approaching to that which the theory
of the reasoning process attained in their hands. But they made in it no
contemptible proficiency; and notwithstanding all the assistance which
might have been derived from the discoveries of Locke and Brown, for the
improvement of this branch of philosophy, modern metaphysicians are far
from having yet followed out all the important hints, which the so much
ridiculed schoolmen afforded. It is true, that their classification of
names according to the nature of the things which they signify, has
little merit in the outline, though much in some of the details; but
their classification of names according to the mode of their
signification (of which the doctrine of the Predicables forms a part)
when purified from the taint of Realism which adheres to the expression
but without infecting the substance, constitutes a prodigious step in
the theory of naming; a step which few among their modern successors
have known even how to appreciate, far less to surpass. Their
classification of the modes of predication, co-ordinate with, and
founded on the above classification of terms, and the further division
of propositions according to the nature of the evidence on which they
rest (for such in reality are the distinctions of essential and
accidental, necessary and contingent, propositions) clearly prove them
to have seen, not indeed to the bottom of the subject, but deeper into
it than the generality of those who have constituted themselves, in
modern times, the contemptuous assailants of the school logic. If we add
to what has been enumerated, their observations on Definition and
Division, which though extremely imperfect, contain the germs of many
truths which are still waiting to be developed, we shall have a body of
materials, not, indeed, entirely adequate to the purpose contemplated by
Watts, and so severely condemned by our author, of laying down “rules
for forming clear ideas, and for guiding the judgment,”[*] but
containing much which is highly conducive to that end, Edition: current;
Page: [20] and which, if expanded, systematized, and in some few points
corrected, by a hand competent to the task, would effect nearly all that
any body of instructions or system of rules can possibly accomplish, in
a direct way, towards the purpose which Watts had in view.

In the Compendium of Aldrich,[*] commonly called the Oxford Logic, the
greatest part of this important branch of the Aristotelian philosophy is
omitted, and the remainder most lamely, imperfectly, and in some points
even incorrectly, given. This Treatise, the whole of which, except the
mere technical account of the rules of the syllogism, is utterly
contemptible, has been for many years the text book in use at the only
academical institution in England at which logic forms any part of the
established course of education. The University of Oxford did not always
thus confine her alumni to the worse book extant on the science which
she still compels them to pretend* to learn; for the very best account
which we have ever seen, in a small compass, of the Aristotelian logic
(a work written by a Jesuit, Du Trieu, for the use of the college at
Douay) was printed at Oxford in 1662.† This circumstance, and the
degeneracy which it evinces, form an appropriate comment upon the
benefits of richly-endowed seminaries of education, and of institutions
generally, in which the quantity of service does not regulate the
quantity of reward. But what we would particularly observe is, that this
treatise of Aldrich is almost the only work, professing to be an
exposition of the Aristotelian logic, with which Dr. Whately appears to
be acquainted. He admits himself [p. vii] to have taken more from that
treatise than from any other; and we are sorry to say, that nearly the
whole of his Synthetical Compendium (the supplement and a few passages
excepted) is little more than a paraphrase of Aldrich. The exposition of
the syllogism in Aldrich is clear and accurate, and that of our author,
accordingly, is entitled to the same praise: but in the remainder,
though he has corrected some of the minor oversights of his predecessor,
he has in general followed him so closely in his worst parts, that it is
almost as impossible to gain from the one, as from the other, a single
clear idea.

We cannot select any passage from Dr. Whately’s work, which so forcibly
illustrates all that we have advanced, as his account of the
Predicables. Edition: current; Page: [21] This, as logicians are aware,
is an attempt to classify general terms, i. e. names which, by virtue of
their signification, are applicable in one and the same sense to an
indefinite number of individuals. In the doctrine of the Predicables,
these terms are considered as capable of being predicated, which is as
much as to say affirmed, of some individual thing or things. The problem
is, how many kinds of general names, all of them differing in their mode
of signification, may be predicated of, and may therefore be said to be
names of, one and the same set of individual objects. Logicians have
determined that five different kinds of general names may be so
predicated; and have called them Genus, Species, Differentia, Proprium,*
and Accidens. These are called Predicables, and our author, after
Aldrich, has defined them as follows:

Whatever term can be affirmed of several things, must express either
their whole essence, which is called the Species; or a part of their
essence (viz. either the material part, which is called the Genus, or
the formal and distinguishing part, which is called Differentia, or in
common discourse, characteristic) or something joined to the essence;
whether necessarily (i. e. to the whole species, or, in other words,
universally, to every individual of it), which is called a Property
[Proprium]; or contingently (i. e. to some individuals only of the
species), which is an Accident.

(P. 62.)

To render this intricate and involved sentence less unintelligible, Dr.
Whately subjoins [ibid.] a synoptical table of the Predicables, for
which we must refer our readers to the work itself.

If it be the object of a definition to render that clear, which was
before obscure, our author can scarcely flatter himself that what he has
here given, is entitled to the name. If his readers had any thing
approaching to a distinct conception of the predicables before (as they
probably had of Genus and Species) such an explanation as this would be
almost sufficient to throw back the whole subject into inextricable
darkness and confusion.

What is meant by the essence of a thing? What by its whole essence? In
Edition: current; Page: [22] what sense can the word man, which is the
name of a species, be said to express the whole essence of John and
Thomas? Dr. Whately admits elsewhere, that classification is arbitrary;
we may therefore constitute our species as we will; have we the same
arbitrary power over the essences of things? Supposing the essence
understood, what are we to understand by the material part, what by the
formal or distinguishing part of the essence? and what is meant by
something joined to the essence?* The reader will probably imagine that
Dr. Whately cannot have employed so many unusual expressions, without
somewhere explaining their meaning; but no explanation is attempted; it
is throughout assumed that the reader perfectly understands all these
phrases, most of which he probably now hears of for the first time. The
only part of this account of the predicables which is intelligible, is
incorrect: we mean the distinction drawn between Proprium and Accidens,
which conveys ideas totally different from those which logicians have
always attached to the terms, nor is it true that they, or, indeed, any
other philosophers or writers whatsoever, have used the word necessary
as it is here employed, synonymously with universal. That crows are
black, is a universal proposition, and a true proposition, but did any
person ever before dream of calling it a necessary one? Black, as
applied to a crow, is the very word most commonly given by logicians as
an example of an inseparable accident; yet our author classes it as a
Proprium, without seeming to be aware that he is altering the
established classification.

All this while, if Dr. Whately had looked into any of the more
celebrated treatises on the Aristotelian logic, he would have there
found the doctrine of the predicables placed upon a perfectly distinct
and intelligible foundation, and the materials so well prepared for a
thoroughly philosophical explanation of general terms, that, with all
the aids which modern discoveries afford, and with the power of original
thinking which he has elsewhere displayed, he might have had the merit
of carrying this important branch of the philosophy of the human mind
almost to perfection.

But we are not entitled to find fault with Dr. Whately’s explanation of
the Predicables as insufficient, without showing, by an experiment of
our own, that a better explanation might be made. We shall therefore
make the attempt, giving due notice to those who may think the following
dissertation too dry, that if they please they may pass it over.

Edition: current; Page: [23]
With respect to Genus and Species, we shall drop the unmeaning phrases
copied by our author from Aldrich,[*] and which do not bear the remotest
analogy to any thing in Aristotle, or Porphyry, or any of the more
distinguished of their followers, and shall content ourselves with
saying that any class, considered as comprehended in a larger class, is
a species; and vice versâ, the larger class, considered as comprehending
the smaller, is a genus. This we take to be the ordinary and received
meaning of the terms, and it accords with the sense in which the
Aristotelian logicians used them. There was, indeed, one sort of species
which they held to be the species κατ’ ἐξοχὴν, more peculiarly a species
than any other, species specialissima as they termed it, and that was,
the lowest species in any given classification; a species which they
fancied could not be any further subdivided into species, but only into
individuals. This notion was evidently a result of the fundamental error
of the Aristotelian philosophers, which consisted in not perceiving that
classification is arbitrary. They did not consider, that we may erect
any set of individual things into a species, which have any quality in
common among themselves, distinguishing them from others; they did not
see that it depends upon our choice what shall be the lowest species,
but fancied, that, when they had proceeded to a certain length in the
division, they reached the lowest species, and that there, by the
necessity of nature, they were compelled to stop. This was their error;
from which it is difficult to suppose, that the inventor of the maxim
that the species expresses the whole essence of a thing, could be
altogether free.

When this appendage is detached from it, the distinction between Genus
and Species is nothing more than the difference between a larger class
and a smaller. There is a broader line of distinction between these two
predicables and the other three, Differentia, Proprium, and Accidens;
between such words as animal, or man, and such words as white,
carnivorous, or rational.

All nomenclature is connected with some classification: and in all
classification there are two ideas involved, that of the properties or
attributes which form the basis of the classification, and that of the
things which compose the classes themselves. Thus, when animals are
divided into birds, beasts, fishes, and so forth, we are to consider,
with regard to the word fish for example, first, the things comprised in
the class (which are sharks, lampreys, eels, salmon, &c.), and next, the
qualities common to all these things (that of being cold-blooded,
breathing by gills, living in the water, &c.), on account of which they
are erected into a class, and which are implied in the name of the
class, since any animal, or other object, not possessing all these
qualities, would not be termed a fish. The Aristotelian Edition:
current; Page: [24] logicians did not overlook this important
distinction between the two constituent parts which make up the
signification of a name, the things which it is imposed upon, and the
properties on account of which it is imposed. They called the former the
significatum materiale of the term, the latter its significatum formale;
and they sometimes said that it denoted the one, and connoted the other.
The word man denotes John, Thomas, and all other men; it connotes
rationality, the human form, and whatever other may be the qualities
which the name imports, and in the absence of which it would be
withheld. The word white connotes the property of whiteness; it denotes
snow, silver, milk, and all other things which, in consequence of their
possessing that property, we term white.

Now, although all names which denote classes of things (and such are all
the predicables) signify both the class itself, and the attributes which
constitute it a class; or, to speak technically, denote the class, and
connote the attributes;—there is this difference, that in the case of
Genus and Species the idea of the class itself is the leading idea; in
the other three predicables, it is the idea of the attribute. When we
hear the word man, our attention is directed, first to the object, and
from that to the qualities which are implied in the name, and but for
which it would not have received the name; when, on the contrary, we
hear the words rational, or white, the quality of rationality or
whiteness is the first idea which is suggested to the imagination, and
the idea of the white or rational thing is merely secondary. So
perfectly is the idea of the quality here the leading idea, that
adjectives are frequently described to be the names of qualities, which,
in reality, they are not; all names of qualities, as goodness for
example, being substantives. Adjectives are names of things, considered
as having qualities; but in which, the quality being fixed, and the
things variable, the idea of the quality predominates over that of the
thing.

It remains to show in what manner the three adjective predicables,
Differentia, Proprium, and Accidens, are distinguished from one another;
how we are to decide whether any name, in which the idea connoted, that
of the attribute, is the principal idea, should be considered as a
Differentia, a Proprium, or an Accidens, of a given class. We say a
class, because we do not consider the first two of these terms to be
applicable to an individual.

Now here, as it appears to us, the definitions of the schoolmen are
precise, and their classification perfect. The attributes, according to
them, might be either

1. Essential, and then the term connoting it was a Differentia; 2.
Accidental, but necessary, and then the term connoting it was a
Proprium; or 3. Accidental and not necessary, and then the term
connoting it was an Accidens.

Edition: current; Page: [25]
To render this classification intelligible, it is necessary that we
should explain what was here meant by essential and accidental,
necessary and contingent.

1. By the essence, and the essential properties, of a class, were meant
the properties which, as we have already explained, are implied in its
name, or, to use the technical expression, connoted by it. The essence
of the class man consists, according to this definition, of life, the
power of voluntary motion, rationality, and the human form. There are
many other properties which are both common to all mankind, and peculiar
to them, but they are not essential, because, if a race were discovered
destitute of these properties, they would yet, according to the
established meaning of the word man, be called men, if they possessed
the other attributes which we have named. All this is plainly implied,
though not clearly expressed, in the scholastic definition of essence.
All properties, says the definition, are of the essence of man, without
which man can neither be, nor be conceived to be; that is, without
which, an object, whatever may be its other properties, will not be
called man.

It is obvious, that, as classification is arbitrary, and nomenclature
equally so, the word man might, if we had so chosen, have implied any
other properties, instead of these. What should or should not be
essential properties of man, depended upon the will of those who framed
the class, and imposed the name. But the convenience of framing such a
class, and giving it a common name, has been so obvious, that all
mankind have concurred in the classification; and so long as we profess
to adhere to the established nomenclature, it does not depend upon us
what shall be the essential properties of the class, because it does not
belong to us, but to the usage of language, to fix what is implied in
the name.

Every property which was of the essence of a species, every property
implied in the name of a species, might be termed, according to the
schoolmen, a Differentia of that species. But there was this further
distinction, that, as some of the properties which were common to the
species, and implied in its name, might also be common to some larger
class or Genus, including the species, and might be implied in the name
of that likewise, these properties were said to constitute a Generic
Difference, with respect to the species, while the remainder of its
essential properties, which were implied in the name of the species but
not implied in that of the genus, and which served consequently to
distinguish the given species from other species of the same genus, were
termed its Specific Difference. Of the four properties above enumerated
as essential to the class man,—life, and the power of voluntary motion,
are implied, not only in the name of that class, but in the name of the
superior genus, animal, and are therefore Edition: current; Page: [26]
termed the Differentia Generica of man, while rationality and the human
figure, not being implied in the word animal, serve to distinguish the
species man from the other species of that genus, and are called its
Differentia Specifica.

2. All properties or attributes which were possessed by the thing, but
not implied in the name, and were therefore excluded from the rank of
essential properties, were called accidental properties of the class,
and were said to be predicated of it by accident, κατα συμβεβηκὸς,
because it was only by accident that they were true of the whole class,
not having been in any degree taken into account when the class was
framed, and the objects which were to be comprised in it parcelled out.

Accidental properties were further subdivided into those which were
necessary and those which were not necessary; which were, as it is
otherwise expressed, contingent. The first kind of property (or rather
the name which connotes it) was called Proprium, the second Accidens. We
shall endeavour to explain this remaining distinction without reference
to our author’s strange misunderstanding of the meaning of the word
necessary, as applied to a property or a proposition.

Of the properties of a class, there are some which, as we have before
seen, are implied in its name, and these are called its essential
properties; but there are some also, which, although not implied in the
name of the species, are capable of being demonstratively deduced from
those which are: and these were the properties to which the followers of
Aristotle applied the name Proprium. Thus the property of being bounded
by three straight lines is implied in the name of the class Triangle,
and is one of its essential properties: the property of having the sum
of its angles equal to two right angles may be shown, by demonstration,
to follow from this essential property, but is not itself an essential
property, not being implied in the name; for, if we were to discover
that Euclid’s demonstration is incorrect, and that the two properties
are not co-extensive, the name would certainly follow the former
property, not the latter. Being an accidental property, therefore, and
yet a necessary property, because the supposition of its being taken
away, while the essential properties of a triangle remain, “implicat
manifestam contradictionem,”* it is termed a Proprium. All other
accidental properties are called simply by the name of Accidens.

All the five Predicables, with their distinguishing characteristics, may
be exhibited in a Synoptic Table of the following form:

Edition: current; Page: [27]
PREDICABLES, _or_ GENERAL TERMS _capable of being predicated of a Class_
1
2
3
The name of the class itself,
The name of any larger class which includes it,
Any property implied in the name of the class,
Any property belonging to the class, but not implied in its name
Species
Genus
Differentia
Implied likewise in the name of the larger class. _Generic Difference_
Implied in the name of the given class, but not in that of the larger
class, _Specific Difference_
4.
5
Capable of being deduced by demonstration from some property implied in
the name of the class,
Not capable of being so deduced,
Proprium
Accidens.

When thus expressed, the Aristotelian classification of general terms
has, at least, the advantage of being intelligible.* It is also evident,
that the classification is complete; that it comprehends every thing
which can be truly predicated of a class. It does not belong to this
place to afford any illustrations or proofs of its vast utility,
especially in all questions relating to the original foundation of human
knowledge, and the different kinds of evidence on which it rests. But we
may have occasion hereafter, in touching upon that more extensive
subject, to follow out some of the above observations to their ulterior
consequences: and, in the mean time, it may be sufficient, as a
protection against the accusation of elaborate trifling, to observe,
that to point out, and make plain and intelligible, distinctions which
really exist, whether it be attended with immediate practical
consequences or not, at least conduces always to the clearness of our
ideas.

We shall not here set forth the manner in which the unfortunate
confusion, in our author’s mind, between the words necessary and
universal, has vitiated a great part of what he has said on the subject
of Propositions. But there is one point remaining—a point of very great
importance—on which we think that Dr. Whately has profited little by the
discoveries of modern metaphysicians; it is the subject of Definition.

Edition: current; Page: [28]
A Nominal Definition, [says he,] (such as are those usually found in a
dictionary of one’s own language) explains only the meaning of the term,
by giving some equivalent expression, which may happen to be better
known. Thus you might define a “Term,” that which forms one of the
extremes or boundaries of a proposition; and a “Predicable,” that which
may be predicated; “decalogue,” ten commandments; “telescope,” an
instrument for viewing distant objects, &c. A Real Definition is one
which explains and unfolds the nature of the thing; and each of these
kinds of definition is either accidental or essential. An essential
Definition assigns (or lays down) the constituent parts of the essence
(or nature). An accidental definition (which is commonly called a
description) assigns the circumstances belonging to the essence, viz.
Properties and Accidents (e.g. causes, effects, &c.) thus, “man” may be
described as “an animal that uses fire to dress his food, &c.”

(Pp. 71-2.)

We do not intend to comment upon the obscurity and confusion of the
latter part of this passage, occasioned by the unhappy imperfection of
our author’s explanation of the predicables; but to observe, thatabtheb
distinction between nominal and real definitions, between definitions of
words and what are called definitions of things, although conformable to
the ideas of most of the Aristotelian logicians, cannot, as it appears
to us, be maintained. We apprehend that no definition is ever intended
to “explain and unfold the nature ofcthec thing.” It is some
confirmation of our opinion, that none of those writers who have thought
that there were definitions of things, have ever succeeded in
discovering any criterion by which the definition of a thing can be
distinguished from any other proposition relating to the thing. The
definition, they say, unfolds the nature of the thing: but no definition
can unfold its whole nature; and every proposition in which any quality
whatever is predicated of the thing, unfolds some part of its nature.
The true state of the case we take to be this:—All definitions are of
names, and of names only: but, in some definitions, it is clearly
apparent, that nothing is intended except to explain the meaning of the
word; while, in others, besides explaining the meaning of the word, it
is intended to be implied that there exists a thing corresponding to the
word. Whether this be or be not implied in any given case, cannot be
collected from the mere form of the expression. “A centaur is an animal
with the upper parts of a man and the lower parts of a horse;” and “A
triangle is a rectilineal figure with three sides,” are, in form,
expressions precisely similar; although in the former it is not implied
that any thing, conformable to the term, really exists, while in the
latter it is; as may be seen by substituting, in both definitions, the
word means for is. In the first expression, “a centaur means an animal,”
&c., the sense would remain unchanged: in the second, “a triangle
means,” &c. the meaning would be altered, since it would be obviously
impossible to Edition: current; Page: [29] deduce any of the truths of
geometry from a proposition expressive only of the manner in which we
intend to employ a particular sign.

There are, therefore, expressions, commonly passing for definitions,
which include in themselves more than the mere explanation of the
meaning of a term. But it is not correct to call an expression of this
sort a peculiar kind of definition. Its difference from the other kind
consists in this, that it is not a definition, but a definition and
something more. The definition above given of a triangle, obviously
comprises, not one, but two propositions, perfectly distinguishable: the
one is, “There may exist a figure bounded by three straight lines:” the
other, “and this figure may be termed a triangle.” The former of these
propositions is not a definition at all; the latter is a mere nominal
definition, or explanation of the use and application of a term. The
first is susceptible of truth or falsehood, and may therefore be made
the foundation of a train of reasoning: the latter can neither be true
nor false; the only character it is susceptible of is that of conformity
or disconformity to the ordinary usage of language.a

We have much to say, likewise, on Dr. Whately’s Essential and Accidental
Definitions, his Separable and Inseparable Accidents, &c. But we have
said enough, perhaps more than enough, in the tone of criticism, upon
his Synthetical Compendium. In our examination of the remainder of his
work, we shall have the less invidious office of displaying merits
rather than of detecting faults.

The latter half of the volume consists of a Treatise on Fallacies, and a
Dissertation on the Province of Reasoning.

The subject of Fallacies has not been disregarded by logical writers. In
most treatises of logic, a chapter has been devoted to the enumeration
and classification of them. But logicians have not, hitherto, elicited
much that is recondite or valuable on this subject. They seem to have
exhausted the whole vigour of their intellects in laying down principles
and rules, by the application of which a fallacy, if any exist in an
argument, may be detected; and to have expended little philosophy in
devising the means of distinguishing what kind of fallacy it was, in
what cases such a fallacy was most to be apprehended, and by what
previous habits the mind might be, with the greatest probable efficacy,
protected against its approach. Perceiving clearly, in this division of
the subject, the ineptitude of Aldrich, whose deficiencies, however, in
this instance are no greater than those of much abler writers, Dr.
Whately has left the beaten track of his predecessors, and applied his
own powers of thought to the task of describing, characterizing, and
classing, fallacies.

The reader who should expect to find, in this excellent dissertation, a
dry catalogue of names or a string of technical definitions, would be
most agreeably disappointed in its perusal. It abounds with apt examples
and Edition: current; Page: [30] illustrations drawn from almost all the
most interesting subjects in the range of human knowledge, and is
interspersed with many just and acute observations on the errors of
controversialists, the mental habits by which the liability to be
deceived by fallacies is heightened or decreased, and the general
regulation of the intellectual faculties.

From the examples here given of fallacious arguments, much instruction
may be derived of a nature not strictly logical; since the refutation of
a sophism, be it in what science it may, is in itself a good,
independently of its use as an exercise, to fit the mind for detecting
and avoiding others. In the Preface to his Elements of Rhetoric, lately
published, Dr. Whately complains [pp. viii-x] that some have blamed him
for availing himself of these examples as a vehicle for opinions of his
own, in which the persons by whom he is thus criticized do not concur.
We know not who are the persons thus alluded to, but the objection, by
whomsoever made, is (as it seems to us) extremely unreasonable. If logic
be of use for the establishment of any truths, they must be truths which
need establishment—truths which there is at least a chance that some of
those to whom they are presented may not immediately admit. For the
settlement of a dispute, it is a necessary condition that the dispute
should exist, or at least be capable of existing. There is little use in
trying an argument by logical rules when it is sufficiently clear
already whether it be valid: and, in point of fact, we are firmly
persuaded, that the extremely familiar and obvious arguments by which
logical writers have in general illustrated the doctrine of the
syllogism, have contributed not a little to the low estimation in which
the science is commonly held by superficial persons, who, finding that
from the beginning to the end of a work professing to deliver the Art of
Reasoning, that art is never once employed to establish a single truth
of which any man could doubt, or refute one sophism by which he could
for an instant be deceived, had some colour for representing logic as a
mere nomenclature, and applying to it what was wittily said of a sister
science, that

-   

    All a rhetorician’s rules
-   

    Teach nothing but to name his tools.[*]

In adopting, however, the more judicious course, of illustrating the
principles of logic by means of arguments of which the soundness or
fallacy could not so readily be perceived without the aid of those
principles, the teacher of that science exposes himself to another
danger, from which we cannot say that, in our opinion, Dr. Whately has
always been quite successful in guarding himself. It has been already
remarked, that the most unerring skill in the application of logical
rules will not protect the reasoner from Edition: current; Page: [31]
false conclusions if his premises are unsound. Now, although his error,
when it proceeds from such a cause, is in no wise imputable to logic,
its apparent absurdity is not a little heightened by the scientific
apparatus with which he has so cautiously protected himself from falling
into any conclusion but that to which his false premises legitimately
lead. So likewise if, in order to refute opponents, a logician permits
himself to fill up a suppressed link of their argument with a
proposition which they allow to be false, when one which they affirm to
be true would equally have sufficed to support their conclusion, and by
this method gains an easy victory over an argument which was never
maintained—the adversary, being perhaps ignorant of logic, and thinking
himself logically confuted when his reason tells him that he is not
substantially so, is likely enough to conclude that the rules of logic
afford no criterion whatever of the validity of an argument. Thus Dr.
Whately says,

If a man expatiates on the distress of the country, and thence argues
that the government is tyrannical, we must suppose him to assume either
that “every distressed country is under a tyranny,” which is a manifest
falsehood, or merely that “every country under a tyranny is distressed,”
which, however true, proves nothing, the middle term being
undistributed.

(P. 137.)

With submission, we would observe, that the supposed reasoner need not
maintain either the false proposition, or that which does not prove the
conclusion: he might assume, not that “every distressed country is under
a tyranny,” but that every country which is blessed with a fertile soil,
rich mineral productions, a situation highly favourable to commerce, and
an orderly, intelligent, and industrious, population, may, if it be
distressed, impute its miseries to the tyranny, or, at least, to the
vices, of its government. And it might be, that the circumstances of the
country in question were in accordance with the above hypothesis. Dr.
Whately has therefore, with much ostentation of logic, failed in his
attempt to refute this argument: which, indeed, like many other
arguments in which the premises only are disputable, and not the
justness of the illation, may or may not be a sophism according to
circumstances, and consequently does not admit of any general
refutation. We are sure that our author cannot justly impute so flagrant
an abuse of logical principles to Mr. Bentham, upon whose Book of
Fallacies[*] he is somewhat unnecessarily severe (p. 194n). We mention
these things merely because we think it right to shew that they have not
escaped our observation. We should deserve contempt if such faults as
these, in matters only incidental to the main subject, could affect our
estimation of the work as a scientific treatise, or even materially
alter our feelings Edition: current; Page: [32] towards the author. For
the man who labours, whether from superstition or self-interest, to keep
back the progress of the human mind, we reckon it no apology that the
evil which he does he is besotted enough to mistake for good: but every
one who is really and efficiently engaged in enlightening mankind, we
regard, howsoever we may dissent from some of his views, as a
confederate and brother in arms, a fellow labourer in the same great
cause with ourselves. If our advances are not met with equal cordiality,
that does not affect our duty; the admirable purpose of this volume, and
the immense good which it is effecting, would be a sufficient atonement
for twenty times the number of trespasses against candour and the rules
of fair and honourable controversy, which can be discovered in it. The
number of bigots and knaves in the world is not so small, nor the
friends of improvement so numerous, that any portion of the indignation
due to the first can, with any justice, be diverted to the second.

The Dissertation on the Province of Reasoning exhibits a greater reach
of thought, and power of original investigation, than is shewn in any
other part of the volume. It is divided into five chapters. 1st, On
Induction. 2nd, On the Discovery of Truth. 3rd, On Inference and Proof.
4th, On Verbal and Real Questions. 5th, On Realism.

In the chapter on Induction, it is the chief object of our author to
prove that induction is not, as it seems to be generally considered, a
distinct kind of argument from the syllogism.

This mistake, [he observes,] seems chiefly to have arisen from a
vagueness in the use of the word induction, which is sometimes employed
to designate the process of investigation, and of collecting facts;
sometimes the deducing an inference from those facts. The former of
these processes (i.e. that of observation and experiment) is undoubtedly
distinct from that which takes place in the Syllogism; but then it is
not a process of argument; the latter, again, is an argumentative
process; but then it is, like all other arguments, capable of being
Syllogistically expressed. (P. 208.)

In the process of reasoning, [he continues,] by which we deduce, from
our observation of certain known cases, an inference with respect to
unknown ones, we are employing a syllogism in Barbara with the major*
Premiss suppressed; that being always substantially the same, as it
asserts, that “what belongs to the individual or individuals we have
examined, belongs to the whole class under which they come;” e.g. from
an examination of the history of several tyrannies, and finding that
each of them was of short duration, we conclude, that “the same is
likely to be the case with all tyrannies;” the suppressed major Premiss
being easily Edition: current; Page: [33] supplied by the hearer; viz.
“that what belongs to the tyrannies in question is likely to belong to
all.”

[Pp. 208-9.]

This is a just, and, so far as we are aware, an original remark; and its
consequences are extremely important. Deliberate consideration does not
indeed shew it to be so complete an answer as it at first appears, to
those writers who set up Induction in opposition to Syllogism; for if
this were the only reply that could be made to them, they might with
justice allege, that although, in the inductive process, the only part
which can be correctly termed reasoning is syllogistic, that part is,
however, extremely simple and obvious, the inductive syllogism being one
and the same in all cases; and that in a case of vitious induction, it
is not in this step of the process that the mistake ever lies. The
importance, therefore, of Dr. Whately’s observation consists rather in
the more clear conception which it gives of the nature of Induction
itself: in confirmation of which, it may be stated, that this one remark
would have sufficed to correct the erroneous notion which the ancients
had of induction, and to which Lord Bacon justly ascribes the gross
errors they committed in the investigation of nature. They in fact
mistook altogether the inductive syllogism, completing it by the
addition of a minor, instead of a major; as is shown by Dr. Whately in
the note to the above passage.

The object of the next chapter, on the Discovery of Truth, is to
inquire, how far reasoning, that is, syllogism, affords the means by
which any new truths are brought to light. The author was incited to
this inquiry by the frequency of the accusation against logic, that it
is wholly unserviceable in the investigation of truth: he refutes this
imputation most triumphantly, and his ideas on the entire subject are
philosophical and just. He says, that it is true, reasoning does not
enable us to discover truths which were not implied and contained in any
thing previously known; but that many truths, virtually involved in
propositions which we have already assented to, might practically,
unless elicited by a process of reasoning, have remained for ever as
completely unknown, as if they did not result from the knowledge we
previously possessed. Of this fact, the whole science of mathematics is
a perpetual proof. All geometry is in reality implied in the axioms and
definitions, and all mechanics in the three laws of motion, and that of
the composition and resolution of forces; but if it had not been for the
ratiocinative process by which we compel these elementary truths to
bring forth the fruit which is in them, they would have remained for
ever barren; mankind would, it is true, in a certain sense, have
possessed these magnificent sciences, but no otherwise than as the ore
in an undiscovered mine is possessed by the owner of the ground wherein
it lies.

Metaphysicians have found it a very difficult problem, to explain on
Edition: current; Page: [34] philosophical principles this seeming
paradox; to prove that possible, which experience certifies to be true;
that mankind may correctly apprehend and fully assent to a general
proposition, yet remain for ages ignorant of myriads of truths which are
embodied in it, and which, in fact, are but so many particular cases of
that which, as a general truth, they have long known. We do not think
that our author has advanced much nearer than his predecessors to the
solution of the mystery: but he has illustrated the fact itself most
elegantly and instructively; and that person must be far advanced in
this kind of knowledge, who can read the chapter without deriving from
it an important addition to his stock of valuable ideas.

The same remark applies, though in a less degree, to the two succeeding
chapters, on “Inference and Proof,” and on “Verbal and Real Questions.”
In the first of these, our author points out the distinction between the
function of the philosopher, and that of the advocate; of him who
combines together premises with no other view than that of arriving by
means of them at some new and useful conclusion, and him whose
conclusion is given, and who has to seek for premises, by the
combination of which, he may be enabled to demonstrate that particular
conclusion and no other. In the next chapter, Dr. Whately defines more
clearly and in more precise and logical language than former writers,
the distinction between what are called Verbal, and Real, questions. His
remarks on this subject, when once stated, appear almost too simple to
require statement; but the frequency with which differences affecting
merely the application of a word, are mistaken for real diversities of
opinion respecting matters of fact, and the latter in their turn (for
this too is no unfrequent case) stigmatized, from a misapprehension of
the point at issue, as merely verbal disputes, renders the clear
statement of the distinction, however obvious it may appear, no
unimportant service.

Lastly, Dr. Whately enters into an examination of the notion of the
Realists, that genera and species are real things, having an independent
existence; that to every general name there corresponds an actually
existing thing, distinct as well from the individuals contained in the
class, as from the qualities belonging to these individuals, which were
the occasion of their being formed into a class. Dr. Whately observes,
and his experience is borne out by our own, that although few persons,
if any, in the present day, avow and maintain this doctrine, those who
are not especially on their guard are perpetually sliding into it
unawares; and he proceeds with much acuteness to set forth several
circumstances not previously noticed, which have contributed in no
trifling degree to the prevalence of this error.

We have now brought our critical observations on Dr. Whately’s work to a
close. But we cannot dismiss the subject, without expressing a hope that
Edition: current; Page: [35] the powers of philosophizing, of which he
has afforded an earnest in this work, may not lie idle, nor be diverted
to any other subject, until he has accomplished some part of what is
still wanting to the elucidation of this. A large portion of the
philosophy of General Terms still remains undiscovered; the
philosophical analysis of Predication, the explanation of what is the
immediate object of belief when we assent to a proposition, is yet to be
performed: and though the important assistance rendered by general
language, not only in what are termed the exact sciences, but even in
the discovery of physical facts, is known and admitted, the nature of
the means by which it performs this service is a problem still to a
great extent unsolved. Let Dr. Whately carry to the investigation of
these subjects, the knowledge he possesses of the science which he has
so usefully expounded, together with the acquaintance, which he either
possesses or might acquire, with the discoveries of modern
metaphysicians in this field of inquiry, and we feel confident that he
would produce a work which would contribute even more to the advancement
of knowledge, and entitle him to still higher permanent fame, than the
excellent Treatise, of which we here close our examination.

Edition: current; Page: [36] Edition: current; Page: [37]


NOTES ON SOME OF THE MORE POPULAR DIALOGUES OF PLATO
 1834–35

Edition: current; Page: [38]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Four of the following nine commentary-translations appeared in the
Monthly Repository in instalments from Feb., 1834, to March, 1835,
signed “A”; the other five have not previously been published. The
published ones are identified in JSM’s bibliography as “Notes on some of
the more Popular Dialogues of Plato, published in various numbers of the
Monthly Repository: viz.” (MacMinn, 37), followed by the entries given
in the Editor’s Notes to the separate items below.

For discussions of these translations see the Introduction and the
Textual Introduction, xvii-xxviii and lxxx-lxxxiii above.

Edition: current; Page: [39]


The Protagoras

[Monthly Repository, VIII (Feb., and March, 1834), 89-99, and 203-11.
Not republished; signed “A.” Running heads: “Plato’s Dialogues; the
Protagoras.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography (after the general heading
cited on 38 above) as “No I. The Protagoras: part 1 in the M.R. for
Febry 1834 / : part 2 in the M.R. for March 1834” (MacMinn, 37). In the
copy in the Somerville College Library, a correction of “Socrates” to
“Pythagoras” is indicated, probably not in JSM’s hand, at 43.28; at
44n.6 inked corrections in that copy change ψυχὴαν to ψυχὴν and παρτὰς
to παρὰ τὰς.

For comments on this and the other translations, see the Introduction
and the Textual Introduction, xvii-xxviii and lxxx-lxxxiii above.]

considering the almost boundless reputation of the writings of Plato,
not only among scholars, but (upon their authority) among nearly all who
have any tincture of letters, it is a remarkable fact, that of the great
writers of antiquity, there is scarcely one who, in this country at
least, is not merely so little understood, but so little read. Our two
great “seats of learning,” of which no real lover of learning can ever
speak but in terms of indignant disgust, bestow attention upon the
various branches of classical acquirement in exactly the reverse order
to that which would be observed by persons who valued the ancient
authors for what is valuable in them: namely, upon the mere niceties of
the language first; next, upon a few of the poets; next, (but at a great
distance,) some of the historians; next, (but at a still greater
interval,) the orators; last of all, and just above nothing, the
philosophers. An English bookseller, by the aid of a German scholar,
recently produced an excellent edition of Plato;[*] the want of sale for
which, by the way, is said to have been one of the causes of his
insolvency. But, with the exception of the two dialogues edited by Dr.
Routh,[†] we are aware of nothing to facilitate the study of the most
gifted of Greek writers, which has ever emanated from either of the
impostor-universities of England; Edition: current; Page: [40] and of
the young men who have obtained university honours during the last ten
years, we are much misinformed if there be six who had even looked into
his writings. If such be the neglect of the best parts of classical
learning among those whose special vocation and whose positive duty it
is to cultivate them, what can be expected from others? Among those who
are engaged in the incessant struggle which, in this country,
constitutes more and more the business of active life—every man’s time
and thoughts being wholly absorbed in the endeavour to rise, or in the
endeavour not to fall, in running after riches, or in running away from
bankruptcy—the tranquil pursuit not only of classical, but of any
literature deserving the name, is almost at an end. The consequence is,
that there are, probably, in this kingdom, not so many as a hundred
persons who ever have read Plato, and not so many as twenty who ever do.

Among those, again, who, in the present or in former ages, have been
more or less acquainted with the productions of the master-mind of
antiquity, extremely conflicting and extremely vague notions have been
entertained concerning the nature of his opinions, and the scope or
purpose of his works. It is, in truth, extremely difficult to ascertain
what were, and were not, Plato’s own opinions. We have all heard of
Platonists, and the Platonic philosophy; but though, out of detached
passages of his writings, philosophic systems have been subsequently
manufactured, it is to this day a problem whether Plato had a
philosophy: if he had, it certainly was not the philosophy of those who
have called themselves Platonists. This uncertainty arises from a
variety of causes. In the first place, the author never speaks in his
own person, but affects to be the mere narrator of conversations stated
to have taken place between other and known individuals. When, too, the
dialogue is of a controversial kind, as is almost always the case, the
interlocutor to whom the victory is invariably assigned, not only is not
the author himself, but is not even a man of straw, who might be
supposed to be the author’s representative; but a philosopher of the
highest merit and reputation, who had decided and known opinions of his
own—the author’s master, Socrates. It can only be conjectured, with more
or less probability, whether any part of these conversations actually
took place as alleged; and if not, how far they were invented as mere
specimens of argumentation and inquiry—how far to illustrate the
opinions of Socrates—and how far to inculcate those of Plato himself.
The difficulties of arriving at any certain solution, are further
complicated by the preference which is shown in most of the dialogues
for overthrowing the various doctrines already in vogue, rather than for
setting up any others in their room; and the frequent use of that
“irony” for which Socrates was celebrated, and which superadds to the
doubt whether the entire discourse has Edition: current; Page: [41] any
serious purpose, a still further question how much of the particular
passage is intended to be taken seriously.

If we might be permitted to mention the hypothesis respecting Plato’s
own opinions and purposes, which appears to ourselves the most probable,
it is one which has been suggested to us by a little essay of the
celebrated Schleiermacher, on the Character of Socrates as a
Philosopher; a translation of which, with the addition of some valuable
remarks, has recently been put forth by one of the few genuine scholars
of whom our country can still boast, the Rev. Connop Thirlwall, in his
periodical work, the Philological Museum, published at Cambridge.[*] Dr.
Schleiermacher’s view of the nature of the service rendered to
philosophy by Socrates, is that it consisted not in the truths which he
actually arrived at, but in the improved views which he originated
respecting the mode in which truth should be sought: and this appears to
us to be, with some modifications, applicable likewise to Plato. No
doubt, the disciple pushed his mere inquiries and speculations over a
more extended surface, and to a much greater depth below the surface,
than there is any reason to believe that his master did. But though he
continually starts most original and valuable ideas, it is seldom that
these, when they relate to the results of philosophic inquiry, are
stated with an air of conviction, or as if they amounted to fixed
opinions. But when the topic under consideration is the proper mode of
philosophizing—either the moral spirit in which truth should be sought,
or the intellectual processes and methods by which it is to be attained;
or when the subject matter is not any particular scientific principle,
but knowledge in the abstract, the differences between knowledge and
ignorance, and between knowledge and mere opinion; then the views
inculcated are definite and consistent, are always the same, and are put
forward with the appearance of earnest and matured belief. Even in
treating of other subjects, and even when the opinions advanced have
least the semblance of being seriously entertained, the discourse itself
has generally a very strong tendency to illustrate the conception which
does seem to be really entertained of the nature of some part or other
of the process of philosophizing. The inference we would draw is, that,
on the science of the Investigation of Science, the theory of the
pursuit of truth, Plato had not only satisfied himself that his
predecessors were in error, and how, but had also adopted definite views
of his own; while on all or most other subjects, he contented himself
with confuting the absurdities of others, pointing out the proper course
for inquiry, and the spirit in which it should be conducted, and
Edition: current; Page: [42] throwing out a variety of ideas of his own,
of the value of which he was not quite certain, and which he left to the
appreciation of any subsequent inquirer competent to sit in judgment
upon them. With respect to many of his most interesting speculations,
that inquirer is yet to come; so far have the penetration and sagacity
of the man of genius outstripped the slow and halting march of positive
science.

Of a writer of this character it is, of course, impossible to convey any
notion by an enumeration of his tenets or a compendium of his
philosophy, since he has nothing which can be called, with any
assurance, tenets or a philosophy. Unhappily, the only complete
translation which exists in our own language[*] is full of faults, and
often with difficulty understood even by those who can read the
original.* In the absence of the only tolerable substitute for a
knowledge of the author himself, some conception, however distant and
imperfect, of what he is, may, perhaps, be derived from a very full
abstract of some of the more interesting of his dialogues. It is in this
hope that the following notes, made originally for the writer’s personal
satisfaction in the course of his private studies, shown, after the
lapse of years, to one or two friends who were unacquainted with the
writings of Plato, and unexpectedly found to be interesting to them, are
now laid before a wider circle of readers. In the execution they have no
pretension to any other merit than that of fidelity. Of the dramatic
excellencies of the dialogues (which the finest specimens of the higher
comedy have hardly equalled, and certainly not surpassed) little could
be preserved in these sketches compatibly with any degree of
abridgement. But the more important and interesting of the argumentative
portions of each dialogue are very little curtailed, and in other
respects approach as near to literal translations as the writer,
consistently with producing such English as could be expected to be
understood, knew how to make them.

The dialogue with which it is proposed to commence is the Protagoras;
supposed to be one of the earlier productions of the author. There is no
work of Plato which more obviously appears to have been intended rather
as an exercise in the art of investigating truth, than to inculcate any
particular set of philosophical opinions. Many ingenious and some
profound thoughts are, indeed, thrown out in the course of the
discussion. But even if we had to form our judgment of this dialogue
without the light Edition: current; Page: [43] thrown upon it by the
other works of Plato, we should be compelled to draw one of two
conclusions; either that the author had not yet made up his opinions on
the topics treated in the dialogue, or that he did not think this a
proper place for unfolding them.

Protagoras, who along with Socrates is the chief interlocutor in the
dialogue, was one of the people called Sophists; and seems to have been
the first who avowedly took the title. Many of Plato’s writings are
directly aimed against the Sophists; and those writings have been the
chief cause why, in modern times, a designation, which originally meant
“a teacher of wisdom,” has become significative of quibbling and deceit.
Certain Church of England writers, in the Quarterly Review and other
publications, have, for the base purpose of discrediting free
institutions and freedom of inquiry, on the one hand exaggerated grossly
the mischievous tendency of what the Sophists taught; and on the other,
represented them as enjoying great favour and importance in the free
States of Greece, and particularly at Athens; just as the same writers
have represented the persons called Sycophants (that is, people who
stirred up vexatious prosecutions in the Athenian courts of justice) as
especial favourites with the “sovereign multitude,” in the face of the
overwhelming evidence which the whole mass of Athenian literature
affords, that these persons were as odious to the people as the lowest
class of pettifogging attorneys, or even common informers, in our own
country. With regard to the Sophists, this very dialogue of Plato
affords (as will be seen) strong evidence that when he began to write,
they were already in very ill repute; while all that is really known of
them tends to throw great doubt upon their having, as a class, really
deserved that degree of obloquy. All inquirers into abstract truth,
except mathematicians—all who were afterwards called Philosophers, (a
term of which Pythagoras[*] is believed to have been the inventor,) had,
before his time, been confounded together under that older name: and
such are seldom popular with the mass of mankind; witness the House of
Commons, and most public assemblies in this country. Among the Sophists
were comprised all the earlier inquirers into physical nature, along
with all the earliest moralists and metaphysicians; and though there
were among the latter, as was inevitable in the infancy of science, as
there are in Plato himself, much fallacy and verbal quibbling, there by
no means appears to have been a greater proportion of doctrines having a
pernicious tendency, than has existed in all ages.

It does not seem to be the object of the present dialogue to expose the
errors or false pretensions of the Sophists in general, or of Protagoras
in Edition: current; Page: [44] particular; for although Protagoras is
confuted, and made to contradict himself again and again, after the
usual manner of Plato, and is occasionally made somewhat ridiculous, for
being only able to harangue, and not to discuss; (the complaint which
Plato never ceases to urge against the Sophists;) yet, when he is
suffered to state his sentiments at length, what he utters is by no
means either absurd or immoral, but, on the contrary, sound and useful
good sense, forcibly expressed, or, at the lowest, an able pleading in
favour of the side he espouses, on whatever question the discussion
happens for the moment to turn upon; and this, too, although the
opinions of Protagoras on the nature, sources, and limits of human
knowledge, are, in other places, the subject of Plato’s warm, but not
disrespectful, attacks.* If it be possible, therefore, to assign any
specific and decided purpose to this dialogue, it would appear to be
intended not to hold up the Sophists either to ridicule or obloquy, but
to show that it was possible to go much beyond the point which they had
attained in moral and political philosophy; that, on the whole, they
left the science of mind and of virtue in an extremely unsatisfactory
state; that they could not stand the test of the rigorous dialectics
which Socrates carried into these inquiries; and that the truth could
only be ascertained by that more accurate mode of sifting opinions,
which the dialectic method (or that of close discussion between two
persons, one of whom interrogates, and the other answers) furnishes, but
which speech-making, and the mere delivery of doctrines from master to
student (the practice of the Sophists) absolutely preclude.

Edition: current; Page: [45]
A brief abstract of the dialogue will, I think, confirm this notion of
its scope and object, by showing that Socrates merely plays with
opinions throughout.

A young man, named Hippocrates, having heard, late in the evening, that
Protagoras has come to Athens, hurries to Socrates in the morning,
before it is light, and presses him to go with him to Protagoras,
expressing the most earnest desire to become the scholar of so wise a
man, and obtain a participation in his wisdom. Socrates consents; but as
it is too early to visit Protagoras at that hour in the morning, they
pass the intermediate time in conversation. Socrates then, in order, as
he says, to try the strength of Hippocrates, begins to question him as
follows: “If you were desirous of receiving the instructions of your
namesake Hippocrates of Cos, and were asked in what capacity, and in
order to become what, you would answer, In the capacity of a physician,
and in order that you might become a physician. If you offered money to
Polycleitus or Pheidias, that they might take you under their tuition,
and were asked the same question, you would answer, In the capacity of
statuaries, and in order that you might become a statuary. Now if any
one should ask you in what capacity you are seeking the instructions of
Protagoras, what would be your answer?”—“In the capacity of a
Sophist.”—“And what do you expect to become through his instructions?”
Hippocrates blushed; and answered, “If this be like the two preceding
cases, I must expect to become a Sophist.”—“Should you not, then, be
ashamed,” said Socrates, “to hold yourself forth as a Sophist to the
Greeks?” He confessed that he should. (This is one of the passages from
which it may be clearly inferred, that the profession of a Sophist was a
disreputable one in Greece before Plato wrote.)

Socrates, however, supplied Hippocrates with a defence, by telling him
that he supposed he did not intend going to Protagoras as he would go to
a physician or an artist, to learn his profession, but as he would go to
a writing-master, a gymnast, or a music-master, not in order to become
himself a music-master, &c. &c., but to learn so much of these arts as
belonged to a liberal education. Hippocrates assenting, Socrates
continued: “Do you know what you are about to do? You are about to give
your soul to be trained into the hands of this man, whom you call a
Sophist; but what a Sophist is, I should be much surprised if you knew;
and yet, if you do not, you must be ignorant whether you are doing a
wise act or a foolish one. What do you suppose a Sophist is?”—“As the
word implies, a man who knows wisdom.”—“You might say as much of a
painter or an architect—he knows wisdom; but if we were asked what
wisdom, we should answer, the wisdom which relates to the taking of
likenesses, and so forth. What is the wisdom which the Sophist knows?
What can he teach you to do?”—“He Edition: current; Page: [46] can teach
me to speak well.”—“This may be a true answer, but not a sufficient one.
On what subject can he teach you to speak well? for a musician can teach
you to speak well on the subject which he knows, viz. music. What can a
Sophist teach you to speak well upon? Upon that which he
knows?”—“Certainly.”—“And what is it which he knows?”—Hippocrates
confessed that he could not tell. “See, then, to what a danger you
expose yourself. If you meditated putting your body into the hands of
any one, at the risk of its well-being, you would consider for a long
time before you made your resolution, and would take counsel with your
friends and relations; but what you value much more than your body—your
spiritual nature*—on the good or bad condition of which your well or
ill-doing entirely depends, you are going to put under the care of a man
whom you only know to be a Sophist, not knowing, as it appears, what a
Sophist is, and this without taking even an hour’s time for
consideration, or asking the advice of anybody. Is not a Sophist a
dealer in those wares which the mind subsists upon?”—“And what does the
mind subsist upon?”—“Upon instruction. Let us not, then, suffer the
Sophist to impose upon us by praising the quality of his wares. Other
dealers praise their wares, although they are no judges what is good for
the sustenance of the body, nor their customers either, unless such as
happen to be physicians or gymnasts. So these men, who hawk their
instructions from city to city, praise all they sell, and yet some of
these may very likely be quite ignorant whether what they offer is good
or bad for the mind, and the purchasers equally so, unless some of them
happen to understand the medicine of the mind. If, therefore, you are a
judge of good and bad instruction, you may safely buy instruction of
Protagoras or any other person; but if not, take care that you do not
endanger what is dearest to you. You risk much more in buying
instruction than food. Food you may take home in another vessel, and
have it examined by qualified persons before you take it into your
stomach; but instruction is taken at once into the mind, and the benefit
is reaped, or the injury incurred, on the spot.”

After this conversation, they proceed together to the house where
Protagoras is living, and find him there with two other
Sophists—Prodicus of Ceos, and Hippias of Elis—who are several times
introduced as personages in the drama, though not called to participate
in the discussion. It may be gathered from what is said of these
persons, and by them, in the course of the work, that Hippias taught
physics more particularly than morals or politics, and that the science
of Prodicus consisted chiefly in drawing frivolous and hair-breadth
distinctions between the significations of terms Edition: current; Page:
[47] which were commonly considered synonymous. This propensity of
Prodicus is displayed in different parts of the dialogue in a very
amusing manner, and several touches in his part might be quoted as
admirable specimens of the higher comedy.

Socrates opens to Protagoras the object of their visit, by telling him
that Hippocrates, a young man of high rank and excellent capacity,
desired to become conspicuous in his country, and thought that this
would be more easily attainable through the instructions of Protagoras.
The Sophist having asked whether Hippocrates would wish to speak with
him alone, or before the numerous company there assembled, and Socrates
having left it to his option, Protagoras commended Socrates for his
discretion, saying, that a stranger, who travels about and draws round
him the most promising young men of every state, making them leave their
other pursuits and associates, and attach themselves to him for the sake
of their own improvement, has need of caution, since such a proceeding
must necessarily excite jealousy and ill-will; and, for this reason, all
the ancient Sophists—for the profession, he contended, was ancient—had
disguised their real pursuit for fear of consequences, and had professed
poetry, the science of divine worship, and even music or gymnastics, as
a cover. But he himself did not follow their example, thinking that they
never effected their purpose: the disguise did not conceal their real
object from the leading men in the various cities, for whose eyes alone
this veil was intended, since the common people merely repeat what they
say; and an unsuccessful attempt at concealment only made the matter
worse, by causing hypocrisy to be added to their other imputed offences.
Protagoras, therefore, openly avowed himself a Sophist, and thought this
a much safer plan than to deny it; and by this and various precautions
he had so managed, that, although he had practised the profession for
many years, no harm had ever come to him in consequence of it.* He,
therefore, preferred that his conversation with Socrates and Hippocrates
should take place before the whole company.

“Suspecting,” says Socrates (who is the supposed narrator of the whole)
“that he wished to make himself glorious in the eyes of Prodicus and
Hippias, from our seeking his society, I proposed inviting them, and
those who were conversing with them, to join in our conversation.”
Accordingly they all assembled, and Protagoras told Socrates that he
might now state his business.

Socrates accordingly repeated what he had already said, that Hippocrates
wished to receive the instructions of Protagoras, and was anxious to
know of what nature was the benefit which he would derive from them.
Edition: current; Page: [48] Protagoras answered, that he would every
day improve, and return home better than he was the previous day. “So,”
said Socrates, “he would, if he were to attend on the painter
Zeuxippus—he would return home improved in painting, and a better
painter; or if he were to attend Orthagoras, the flute-player, he would
every day return home a better flute-player than the day before. In what
respect, if he attends on you, will he every day return home improved?”
Protagoras commended the question, and answered, “He will not be treated
by me in the same manner as by other Sophists, who spoil young men by
putting them back into geometry and astronomy, and the other arts, the
very things which they had previously fled from. I teach them what they
come to learn, viz., how they may best manage their own families, and
how best to speak and act in the affairs of the state.”—“You teach
politics then, and profess to make men good citizens.”—“I do so.”—“You
possess an admirable art, if you do indeed possess it, which I know not
how to disbelieve. But hitherto I had imagined that what you profess to
teach is not capable of being taught, or delivered from men to men. For
the Athenians, who are a wise people, if in their assembly they are
deliberating on ship-building, send for the ship-builders to advise
them, and will hear nobody else; if about building a house, they will
listen to nobody but architects; and if any one else, however noble or
rich, attempt to speak, they scoff and drive him away. But when the
discussion is upon anything which concerns the general management of the
state, they listen to persons of all ranks and professions without
distinction, and never think of reproaching any man for presuming to
advise on the subject when he has never studied it, or learned it of a
master. It is evident, therefore, that they do not think it capable of
being taught; and the best and wisest citizen, as Pericles for example,
though he teaches his sons excellently whatever a master can teach,
cannot succeed in teaching them the wisdom and virtue in which he
himself excels; in this they are no better than ordinary individuals.
For these reasons,” says Socrates, “I have hitherto doubted that virtue
can be taught; but if Protagoras can prove the possibility, I beseech
him to do so.”

Protagoras consents, and asks whether he shall teach by a μυ̑θος, (which
I am inclined to translate a legend), like an old man instructing the
young,* or by a discourse (λόγος). They give him his choice, and he
prefers to tell them a story. If, as this circumstance would indicate,
it was a frequent mode with the Sophists to deliver their doctrines in
this way, it would account for the μυ̑θοι which are scattered through the
writings of Plato, and which, appearing to be related half in jest, half
in earnest, it is not very easy otherwise to explain.

Edition: current; Page: [49]
The story is, that when the gods made men and animals, they gave it in
charge to Prometheus and Epimetheus to endow them; that Epimetheus
solicited the task from his brother, and having obtained it, proceeded
to distribute the endowments of strength, swiftness, &c., among the
various animals, on the principle of compensation; but when he had
exhausted all the endowments which he had to give, he found that man was
left unprovided for. Prometheus, to remedy this blunder, stole τὴν
ἔντεχνον σοϕίαν (scientific wisdom) from heaven, and with it fire,
without which it was of no use, and bestowed these upon man. On this
account was it that man, being akin to the gods, alone of all animals
acknowledged their existence; and, by means of art, acquired the faculty
of speech, made to himself clothes and houses, and procured food. But as
there were no towns, and no human society, for want of the art of
Polity, the human race were in danger of being extirpated by wild
beasts; when Jupiter, in compassion, sent Mercury from heaven to make a
present to mankind of Shame and Justice, in order that there might be
mutual bonds among men, and that society might be possible. Mercury
asked whether he should confer these gifts upon all mankind, or whether,
like Medicine and the other arts, they should be given to a few only,
for the benefit of all. Jupiter ordered him to give them to all; for if
a few only possessed them, political society would be impossible; and
bade him establish a law, as from Jupiter, that he who was incapable of
shame and justice should, as a disease in the state, be extirpated.

“For this reason,” continued Protagoras, “the Athenians and others, who
on architecture or any other manual art will hear only the few who
possess it, are ready, when the subject is social virtue, which depends
wholly upon justice and prudence, to listen to all advisers; because of
this virtue all should be partakers, or states cannot exist.

“And to prove that in reality all men do believe that justice and the
other social virtues ought to belong to all, observe this: If a man
pretends to be a good musician, and is not so, all men ridicule him, and
his friends admonish him as a man out of his senses. But when justice
and the social virtues are the matter in question, although they well
know that a man is unjust, yet if he tells the truth and publicly avows
it, what in the other case they considered to be good sense, is here
thought madness; they maintain that all men should profess to be just,
whether they are so or not, and that he who does not profess it is a
madman, because the man who does not, in some degree, partake of the
quality of justice, is unfit to live amongst mankind.

“It seems, then, that mankind in general think all persons qualified to
advise concerning these virtues, since all are required to possess them.
But further, they think that these virtues are not natural and
spontaneous, but the result of study and of teaching. For those evils
which are supposed to Edition: current; Page: [50] come upon men by
nature or ill fortune, no man ever thinks of reproaching another for:
who ever reprimanded, much less punished, another, for being of low
stature, weak, or deformed? such evils are regarded as an object only of
pity. Men admonish, and censure, and punish one another, for the absence
of those good qualities only, which they deem to be acquired by study
and art; and for this reason only it is that they so deal with the
unjust. Let us but consider what punishment does, and we shall see that,
in the opinion of mankind, virtue may be acquired. No man punishes
another because he has done wrong; this would be the blind vengeance of
the irrational animals. Rational punishment is not on account of the
past act, which, having been done, cannot be undone; it is for the sake
of the future; it is in order that this offender, and those who witness
his punishment, may be warned against offending hereafter. The
Athenians, therefore, and others, since they do punish the unjust man,
do so with this intent; they do so because they think that virtue may be
acquired, and that punishment is a means whereby men are induced to
acquire it.

“To the other argument of Socrates, that good men, although they teach
to their children other things, fail of teaching them to be good, the
following is the answer:—If it be true that there is something which,
unless every member of the state possesses, the state cannot exist; and
if this something be not architecture or pottery, or any mechanical art,
but justice, prudence, holiness, in short, manly virtue; if all men, and
women too, and children, whatever else they have, must have this, or be
punished until they acquire it, or, if incapable of acquiring it, must
be sent out of the country or put to death; and if, nevertheless, good
men, teaching their children other things, do not teach them this, they
are unworthy the name of good men. For that it can be taught we have
clearly shown. Is it credible, then, that men should teach their sons
those things, to be ignorant of which carries with it no evil
consequences, and not attempt to teach them that, which, if they do not
learn, death, banishment, confiscation, destruction of their fortunes
and prospects, will fall upon them? Not so. From infancy upwards they
instruct their children in these things; they tell them what is just and
unjust, honourable and dishonourable, holy and unholy; they bid them
practise the one and avoid the other; and if they disregard the
admonition, correct them by threats and blows. And in placing them with
teachers, they enjoin care of the child’s morals still more earnestly
than of his learning; and the teachers make them read and commit to
memory those passages of poets and other authors, by preference, which
commend virtue and reprove vice. Music also is taught them, chiefly to
soften the mind and accustom it to harmony, and order, and proportion;
and they are delivered to the gymnast, in order that their bodies, being
in good order, may be fitter to obey the commands of a well-ordered
mind. When they leave school, the State Edition: current; Page: [51]
requires them to learn its laws, and regulate their lives by them, as
those who learn to write follow the copy which is set to them by the
writing-master; and if they deviate from this rule they are punished;
and the very name given to punishment indicates its object—it is termed
correction.*

“Nor is it wonderful, notwithstanding this, that good fathers should
have sons of no particular merit. If there were any other branch of
knowledge, the cultivation of which by every citizen were necessary to
the being of the state; if society could not exist unless all could play
on the flute, and if all were taught to play, and reproached if they
played ill, instead of being envied for playing well—(as at present men
are not envied for being just and virtuous, since it is every man’s
interest that others should be just and virtuous, for which reason we
are all eager to teach justice and virtue to all men)—do you suppose
that the sons of good flute-players would be better players than other
men? Not so. Whoever had the best natural disposition for music would be
the best player: a good player’s son would often play ill—the son of a
bad player, well; but all would be competent players, compared with
those who knew nothing of music whatever. In like manner all civilized
men, even the most unjust, if compared with men among whom there is no
training, no tribunals, no laws, with the wild men of whom poets tell
us, would appear a perfect master in virtue: and after mixing with such
men, you would be delighted to meet with the greatest villains of our
own country. But now you are fastidious, and because all are teachers of
virtue, you will not allow that any are so: just as if you were to
inquire in this city who teaches Greek, you would find nobody; or if you
sought somebody competent to teach the son of a mechanic his father’s
art, which he had learned in his father’s shop as well as his father
could teach it, you might find nobody; but of men who could teach those
who were totally ignorant of the art, you would find abundance. It is
thus with virtue: all men teach it; and we may think ourselves fortunate
if we find one who is a little more capable than others of advancing men
towards it. Such a man I profess to be; and I am willing that my
scholars should judge of my pretensions. Accordingly, the terms of my
contract with them are, that when they have received my instructions,
they shall either pay me the amount of my demand, or, if they think this
too much, shall pay me according to their own estimate, made in a temple
and upon oath, of the value of the instructions.”[*]

Protagoras here ceased speaking: and Socrates, after making many
acknowledgments and professing himself almost convinced, said that one
little difficulty still remained in his mind, which no doubt Protagoras
could Edition: current; Page: [52] easily remove. “For if a man were to
apply to Pericles, or any other of the famous orators, he might hear
from them as fine a speech as that which Protagoras had made: but if he
were to put a question to them, they could no more answer, or ask again,
than an inanimate book; but, like brass, which if struck makes a long
reverberation unless we lay our hands upon it and stop it, they make
answer to a short question by an inordinately long harangue. Protagoras,
however, is able not only to make a long speech, but to give a short
answer to a short question: I therefore wish to have one difficulty
explained. You say that virtue can be taught; and you have several times
put together justice, prudence, temperance, and holiness, and called
them collectively by the one word virtue. Is virtue then one thing, and
are all these parts of it, or are they all names for one and the same
thing?” Protagoras answers—“Virtue is one, and all these are parts of
it.”—“Are they such parts as the parts of gold, all of them exactly
resembling the whole, and one another? or (like the parts of the face,
viz. eyes, nose, ears, and mouth) extremely unlike?”—“They are like the
parts of the face.”—“May the same man have one of these parts of virtue,
and be destitute of the others?”—“Yes: many are courageous, but unjust,
and many are just but unwise.”—“Then wisdom and courage are also parts
of virtue?”—“Yes.”—“And unlike each other, as you said of the other
parts?”—“Yes.”

“Let us consider further of this matter. Is justice a just thing or an
unjust one? surely it is a just thing.”—“Undoubtedly.”—“Is holiness a
holy or an unholy thing? most assuredly a holy one.”—“Yes.”—“But you say
that the different parts of virtue are unlike one another. Then since
justice is a just thing, and holiness is not like justice, is holiness
an unjust thing? Since holiness is a holy thing, and justice is not like
holiness, is justice an unholy thing? I should affirm the contrary; that
justice and holiness are either the same, or very nearly alike, and that
nothing is so holy as justice, nor so just as holiness.”—“It does not
appear to me,” replied Protagoras, “so simple and obvious that justice
and holiness are the same thing. There seems to me to be a difference;
but let us call them the same thing, if you will.”—“I have no use,” said
Socrates, “for ‘if you will.’ I do not desire to examine or confute an
‘if you will,’ or an ‘if you think so,’ but what you think, and what I
think, leaving out the ‘if.’ ”—“No doubt,” said Protagoras, “justice and
holiness are somewhat alike: all things, even black and white, hard and
soft, and all other contraries, are alike in some respects. The parts of
the face, which were the comparison we used, are somewhat alike. You
might prove, in this way, all things to be alike. We must not call
things like or unlike merely because they have some little points of
resemblance or of difference.”—“Do you then consider holiness and
justice to have only some little points of resemblance?”—“Not exactly
so, but yet not as you Edition: current; Page: [53] seem to
think.”—“Since this discussion seems to displease you, let us consider
another part of what you said.”

Socrates, accordingly, dropping the subject of justice and holiness, but
still endeavouring to drive Protagoras to an acknowledgment of the
identity of all the virtues, now chooses as his example σωϕροσύνη. This
word, which was in very popular use, and which conveyed to the mind of a
Greek associations of the highest praise, is untranslatable into
English, because we have no single word by which we are accustomed to
express the same combination of qualities and of feelings. Names of what
Locke calls mixed modes,[*] and especially the names of moral
attributes, have very rarely any exact synonymes in another language.
There are few things by which so much light would be thrown upon the
ideas and feelings of a people, as by collecting from a large induction,
and clearing up by an accurate analysis, the niceties of meaning of this
important portion of their popular language. We should thus learn what
moral and intellectual qualities the people in question were accustomed
to think of in conjunction, and as forming part of one and the same
character; and what, both in kind and in the degree of strength, were
the habitual sentiments, which particular moral or intellectual
qualities excited in their minds. How great would be the difficulty of
making an ancient Greek understand accurately what the nations of modern
Europe mean by honour; a Frenchman, what the English mean by the
feelings of a gentleman; any foreigner, what we mean by respectability.
It is equally difficult for an Englishman to enter into the conception
of σωϕροσύνη, and throw himself into the feelings which that word
excited in a Greek mind. Sometimes it seems as if it ought to be
translated prudence, sometimes temperance, sometimes decency or
decorousness, sometimes more vaguely, considerateness, sometimes good
sense. The French word sagesse has nearly the same ambiguities, and
expresses nearly the same mixture of moral and intellectual qualities.*
The connecting tie among these various attributes seems to be this: The
word σωϕροσύνη denoted, in the mind of a Greek, all the qualities or
habits which were considered most contrary to licentiousness of morals
and manners, in the largest sense of the term. In a state of society in
which the control of law was as yet extremely weak, in which the
restraints of opinion, even in the democratic states, acted with little
force upon any but those who were ambitious of public honours, and in
which everywhere (even at Athens, Edition: current; Page: [54] where
person and property were far more effectually protected than in the
other states of Greece) the unbridled excesses of all sorts committed by
the youth of the higher classes, endangered the personal security and
comfort of every man, it is not wonderful that self-restraint, and the
habits of a thoughtful, regulated life, should be held in peculiarly
high esteem.

The great difficulty to an English reader, of following an argumentative
discussion which turns chiefly upon the meaning of a word having no
synonyme in English, will scarcely in this instance be rewarded by the
intrinsic merit of the discussion itself. Socrates forces Protagoras
successively to admit, that σωϕροσύνη is the same thing with wisdom,
that it is the same thing with justice, or at least inseparable from it,
and is pressing him still further, when Protagoras flies off into a long
speech, filled with illustrations from the material universe, on a topic
very distantly connected with the subject which they were discussing. At
the conclusion of this oration he was loudly applauded.

Socrates hereupon observed, that he had a short memory, and if a man
made a long speech to him, he always forgot what it was about. As,
therefore, if he were deaf, Protagoras would think it necessary to speak
to him in a louder than his ordinary voice; so, as he was forgetful, he
hoped that Protagoras would shorten his answers, and accommodate their
length to his capacity. Protagoras demurred to this, and lost his
temper; and there are several pages of excellent comic dialogue, at the
end of which the matter is accommodated by the intervention of the
bystanders; and it is agreed, at the instance of Socrates, that
Protagoras should interrogate and Socrates answer, in order that
Socrates might afford a specimen of what he thought the proper mode of
answering. It turned out an unhappy specimen, however, for Socrates was
led by it to make as long a speech as any in the dialogue.

Protagoras, who appeared anxious to change the subject, said, that he
thought criticism on poetry to be one of the most important parts of
instruction, and he would interrogate him concerning poetry, keeping,
however, on the subject which they were discussing, that of virtue.
Simonides, in one of his poems, says, “It is difficult to become a good
man.”[*] In the same poem he afterwards expresses his dissent from a
saying of Pittacus, Χαλεπὸν ἐσθλὸν ἔμμεναι, (it is difficult to be a
good man). Is not this inconsistent with what he had himself affirmed in
the previous passage?

Socrates pretends at first to be puzzled by this question, and calls in
Prodicus, with his nice distinctions, to help him in finding a
difference Edition: current; Page: [55] between γενέσθαι (to become) and
εἰ̑ναι (to be), and in finding a double meaning for the word χαλεπὸν.
After playing with the subject for some time, he gives his own account
of the matter thus:

“The scope and object,” says he, “of the poem of Simonides, is obviously
to overthrow the dictum of Pittacus, ‘It is difficult to be a good man.’
The wisdom of the ancients,” continues he, “was couched in these little
pithy sentences, like those of the Lacedæmonians in our own day, of
whose institutions and mode of education the sages of old were great
admirers. This sentence of Pittacus, among others, was much quoted and
praised, and Simonides thought that if he could demolish it, he would
obtain the same sort of reputation which is obtained by defeating a
celebrated athlete.”

Socrates then adduces some philological proofs, that the sense of
Simonides was as follows:—It is difficult to be becoming a good man,—to
be in progress towards it; but it is not, as Pittacus says, merely
difficult to be a good man—it is impossible; the gods alone are capable
of actually realizing the conception of goodness. He adduces subsequent
passages of the poem in support of this interpretation. They are to this
effect: “Every man upon whom an irretrievable misfortune falls, becomes
bad. I will not seek for that impossible thing, an entirely blameless
man: I praise and love those (willingly) who do not commit any thing
evil.” “Here,” says Socrates, “he cannot mean, according to the ordinary
collocation, I praise and love those who do not willingly commit any
thing evil. Simonides was too wise to suppose that any man willingly
commits evil: he knew that they who commit evil commit it involuntarily.
He meant, I praise and love willingly those only, who do not commit any
thing evil: meaning that a good man sometimes forces himself to praise
and love those whom he does not love willingly; as for instance, an
ill-doing parent, or his country when ill doing: and the poet
accordingly adds,—‘I am satisfied when I find a man not wicked, nor
entirely inactive, and well versed in civil justice. I will not blame
him: there are enough of fools to blame.’ ”

Socrates having made this commentary upon the poem of Simonides, invites
Protagoras to resume the former discussion; saying, that to converse on
poems seems to him like the resource of men of vulgar minds, who, at
their social meetings, being unable, from ignorance, to converse with
their own voices, call in singing women and musical instruments, and use
their voices in the room of conversation. But men such as most of us
profess to be, do not need the voices of others, nor poets, whom we
cannot interrogate about their meaning, and may dispute about it for
ever. Let us rather discuss with each other, and make trial of our own
powers, and of the possibility of our attaining truth. Having softened
Protagoras by some compliments, and by disclaiming any design in
conversing with him, except Edition: current; Page: [56] that of
facilitating the attainment of truth, by seeking for it in conjunction
with the wisest man whom he knows, he at length prevails upon Protagoras
to make answer to his interrogations: and again asking Protagoras
whether he adheres to his opinion, that wisdom, temperance, courage,
justice, and holiness, are different things, he receives this
answer,—That four of the five are very closely allied, but that courage
is altogether different from the others, since there are many men who
are extremely unwise, intemperate, unjust, and unholy, but highly
courageous.

“By the courageous,” said Socrates, “you mean the daring?”—“Yes; those
who will encounter what others are afraid to face.”—“Virtue is a
beautiful thing, is it not?”—“The most beautiful of all things.”—“Is all
virtue beautiful, or only some virtue?”—“All, and in the highest
degree.”—“Who are they who dive daringly?”—“Divers.”—“Is it because they
understand diving?”—“It is.”—“Who fight on horseback daringly? good
riders or bad?”—“Good riders. In short,” said Protagoras, “those who
know most are the most daring.”—“Are you acquainted with persons who,
although they know nothing of all these matters, are yet extremely
daring?”—“But too much so.”—“Are these to be deemed
courageous?”—“Courage would not be a beautiful thing if they were, since
they are out of their senses.”—“Then if those who dare without knowledge
are not courageous, but are out of their senses, while the wise are not
only daring but courageous, are not wisdom and courage by this account
the same thing?”

“You have not,” said Protagoras, “correctly remembered what I said. I
affirmed that the courageous were daring, but not that the daring were
courageous: had you asked this, I should have answered, Not all of them;
and you have not shown me to have been wrong in affirming that the
courageous were daring. You conclude that wisdom is the same thing with
courage, because those who know are more daring than those who know not:
but in this manner you might prove bodily strength to be the same thing
with courage; for the strong in body, it cannot be denied, are powerful;
and those who know how to wrestle, being undoubtedly more powerful than
those who do not, you might infer that they were more muscular. But I do
not admit that the powerful are strong in body; only, that the strong in
body are powerful. Power is not the same thing with bodily strength;
power may proceed from knowledge, from passion, or from insanity; but
bodily strength, from nature, and good acquired habits of body. In like
manner, I say that daring is not the same thing with courage. Daring may
proceed from scientific skill, from passion, or from insanity; courage,
from nature, and good acquired habits of mind.”

Here commences the last, and most interesting and most philosophical, of
the discussions in this dialogue:—On the true nature of courage; and,
incidentally, on the proper test of virtue and of vice.

Edition: current; Page: [57]
“Do not some men,” asks Socrates, “live well, and others ill?”—“Without
doubt.”—“Does a man live well if he lives in pain and
vexation?”—“No.”—“But if he passes his life pleasantly to its very
termination, he lives well?”—“He does so.”—“To live pleasantly then is
good, to live unpleasantly is evil?”—“If he lives pleasantly by honest
pleasures.”—“You call then some pleasant things evil, and some painful
things good, like the generality of mankind?”—“I do.”—“But are not all
pleasant things good, in so far as they are pleasant, and all painful
things bad, in so far as painful?”—“I am not sure,” answered Protagoras,
“whether it can be universally maintained, that all pleasant things are
good, and all painful things evil. I think that I should answer in a
manner more safe for the present discussion, and more conformable to the
tenour of my life, if I were to say that some pleasant things are not
good, some painful things not evil, and some are neither good nor
evil.”—“Are not pleasant things those which cause, or which partake of,
pleasure?”—“Undoubtedly.”—“And is not pleasure a good?”—“Let us inquire,
and determine whether the good and the pleasant are identical.”—“Unfold,
then, to me another part of your mind, and as we have seen how you are
minded on the subject of the good and the pleasant, let us see whether
your opinion on the subject of Knowledge is the same with that of the
common of mankind. Knowledge, according to the vulgar opinion, is not a
controlling and governing principle. Whatever may be a man’s knowledge,
it is not that, they think, which governs him, but sometimes he is
governed by anger, sometimes by pleasure, sometimes by pain, or love, or
fear; and knowledge is dragged about by all these, and used by them as
their slave. Is this your opinion; or do you, on the contrary, think
that knowledge is a grand and ruling principle, which, wherever it
exists, governs; and that he who knows what is good and evil is
overmastered by nothing, but does that which his knowledge commands?”—“I
think as you now say; and it would be disgraceful to me, if to any one,
to maintain that wisdom and knowledge were not the most commanding of
all human possessions.”—“You speak nobly and truly. But the common herd
do not agree in your opinion; they say that many who know what is best,
and have the power to practise it, do not; and if you ask why, the
answer is, Being overpowered by pleasure, or by pain, or so forth.”—“Men
say this, as they say many other foolish things.”—“Let us then instruct
them what that state is, which they style, being overcome by pleasure.

“When you say, my good friends, that a man is overpowered by pleasure,
you mean, that, being overpowered by delicious meats and drinks and
other delightful objects of sense, knowing that these things are bad, he
yet partakes of them?”—“Certainly.”—“Let us then ask them, In what view
do you say that these things are bad? Is it because they are pleasant,
and afford Edition: current; Page: [58] immediate delight; or because
they afterwards occasion diseases and poverty? If they only conferred
enjoyment, and produced none of these remote effects, would they be bad
merely by causing enjoyment? They would surely answer, that these things
are not bad for the immediate pleasure they afford, but for the diseases
and want which flow from them in the end.”—“They would.”—“But diseases
and want are painful things?”—“They are.”—“It seems then that these
things are bad only because they produce pains, and deprive us of other
pleasures?”—“It appears so.”—“And when, again, you say that there are
good things which are painful, you mean such things as bodily exercises
and the toils of military service, the painful operations of surgery,
and the like?”—“Certainly.”—“And are these good, on account of the acute
suffering with which they are immediately attended, or on account of the
health and good habits of body, and the public safety, empire, and
wealth, which are their ultimate consequence?”—“On account of the
last.”—“They are good, therefore, because they terminate in pleasure,
and in the prevention of other pains; and there is nothing on account of
which things can be called good, except pleasure and
pain.”—“Admitted.”—“Then pleasure is the same thing with good, and pain
with evil: and if a pleasure is bad, it is because it prevents a greater
pleasure, or causes a pain which exceeds the pleasure: if a pain is
good, it is because it prevents a greater pain, or leads to a greater
pleasure. For, if this were not so, you could point out some other end,
with reference to which, things are good or evil: but you
cannot.”—“Granted.”

“But if all this be true, (still addressing the vulgar,) how absurd, we
may tell them, was the opinion you expressed, that a man often, although
knowing evil to be evil, practises it nevertheless, being overpowered by
pleasure? How ridiculous this is, will be plainly seen if we drop some
of the terms which we have hitherto used, and since the pleasant and the
good are but one thing, call them by one name; as likewise, the painful
and the bad. You say, that knowing evil to be evil, a man yet practises
it, being overpowered; by what? They cannot now say, by pleasure; since
we have now another name for it, viz. good. Being overpowered by good!
It is strange, and absurd, if a man practises evil, knowing it to be
evil, being overpowered by good. If we ask whether the good is worthy or
not worthy to overpower the evil, they must answer, Not worthy; for,
otherwise, to be so overpowered would be no fault. How, then, we must
answer, can good be unworthy to overpower evil, or evil to overpower
good, but by reason of its smaller amount? It is clear, then, that what
you call, to be overpowered by pleasure, is to choose a greater evil for
the sake of a less good. If we now drop the words good and evil, and
resume the words pain and pleasure, we find, in like manner, that he who
is said to be overpowered by pleasure, is overpowered by a pleasure
which is unworthy to overpower: and a pleasure Edition: current; Page:
[59] is unworthy to overpower a pain, only by being less in amount. For,
if it be said, The immediately pleasant differs greatly from the
ultimately so, I answer, only in the degree of pleasure and pain. If we
sum up the pleasure and the pain, and place them in opposite scales, we
ought to choose the greater pleasure, or the less pain, whether they are
immediate or remote.

“Now, is it not true that magnitudes appear smaller at a distance,
greater when close at hand? that sounds appear louder when nearer,
fainter when more distant, and the like?”—“Undoubtedly.”—“If, then, our
well-doing depended upon our possessing great magnitudes, and avoiding
small ones, what would our safety depend upon? Upon the faculty of
seeing things merely as they appear, which leads to perpetual errors in
the estimation of magnitudes; or upon the art of measurement, which
teaches us to detect false appearances, and ascertain the real
magnitudes of bodies?”—“Upon the latter.”—“If our safety in life
depended upon always choosing the larger number, and eschewing the less,
what would be our safeguard? surely knowledge: one of the kinds of
knowledge of measurement, since it relates to excess and defect; and
(since it relates to numbers), the knowledge of
arithmetic?”—“Undoubtedly.”

“Since, then, it is upon the proper choice of pleasures and pains that
our well doing in life depends, viz. upon choosing always the greater
pleasure, or the smaller pain, what we here stand in need of is likewise
measurement, since this also relates to excess and defect. But if it be
measurement, it is art, and knowledge. What particular art and knowledge
it is, we shall hereafter inquire; but that it is knowledge, we have
clearly shown, in opposition to that opinion of the vulgar which we set
out with combating.”—Protagoras, and all others who were present,
assented, and it was agreed that doing evil always arose from ignorance,
and doing well from knowledge.

“Since, then, no one chooses evil, knowing it to be evil, but
mistakingly supposing it to be good, no one, who is compelled to choose
between two evils, will knowingly choose the greatest.”—“Allowed.”—“But
what is fear? Is it not the expectation of some evil?”—“It is.”—“Let
Protagoras then defend himself, and show that he did not err, when he
said that courage differed greatly from the other virtues. Did he not
say, that the courageous were they who will encounter what others are
afraid to face?”—“Yes.”—“Who will encounter not merely what the coward
will encounter?”—“Certainly not.”—“The coward will encounter only what
is safe; the courageous man what is formidable?”—“So men say.”—“They do:
but do you say, that the courageous man will encounter what is
formidable, knowing it to be formidable?”—“Your previous argument has
shown this to be untenable.”—“It has: for, if we have reasoned
correctly, no man encounters that which is formidable, knowing it to be
so: for to be Edition: current; Page: [60] overpowered, and lose command
of himself, we have shown to be a mere case of ignorance.”—“We
have.”—“But all, whether brave or cowardly, are ready to encounter what
they consider safe.”—“Very true: but the brave man and the coward differ
even to contrariety in what they encounter. The brave man will encounter
war, the coward will not.”—“War being a noble or an ignoble thing?”—“A
noble thing.”—“And, if noble, good?”—“Certainly.”—“And, if noble and
good, then, by our admission, pleasant?”—“Granted.”—“Are cowards, then,
unwilling to do what they know to be the better and the more
pleasant?”—“To admit this would be to contradict our former
admissions.”—“But the courageous man; he too does what is better and
more pleasant?”—“He does.”—“The courageous man, in short, is neither
bold when he ought not, nor fearful when he ought not; cowards are
both.”—“Yes.”—“But if cowards are bold, and are fearful, when they ought
not, is it not from ignorance?”—“It is.”—“Then men are cowards from not
knowing what is formidable?”—“They are.”—“But what makes men cowards,
must be cowardice?”—“Agreed.”—“Then cowardice is the ignorance of what
is and is not formidable; courage, being the contrary of cowardice,
consists merely in the knowledge of what is, and what is not,
formidable.”—Protagoras with much difficulty allowed that this
consequence followed from what they had previously agreed upon.

Socrates finally remarked what a whimsical turn their discussion had
taken. Protagoras and he had changed parts in the course of it. He had
begun by denying that virtue could be taught, and yet had engaged
himself in a long argument to prove that all virtue consisted in
knowledge, and therefore could be taught; while Protagoras, who had
begun by asserting that virtue is capable of being taught, had as
strenuously laboured to show that it is not knowledge, and therefore not
teachable. “Seeing all this,” said Socrates, “I am entirely thrown into
confusion, and would be most eager to engage in further discussion, and
clear up the question of what virtue is, and whether it can be taught.”
Protagoras applauded his wish, and complimenting him on his powers of
argument, said, “I consider myself not to be in other respects a bad
man, and least of all an envious one. I have already said to many
persons that I admire you above all whom I have met, especially above
those of your own age; and I should not be surprised if you became one
of those who are celebrated for their wisdom. We will pursue the
discussion which you suggest another time; but now other business calls
me away.” And thus the conversation terminated.

It is the object of these papers not to explain or criticise Plato, but
to allow him to speak for himself. It will not, therefore, be attempted
to suggest to the reader any judgment concerning the truth or value of
any of the opinions which are thrown out in the above dialogue. Some of
them are Edition: current; Page: [61] so far from being Plato’s own
opinions, that the tendency of his mind seems to be decidedly adverse to
them. For instance, the principle of utility,—the doctrine that all
things are good or evil, by virtue solely of the pleasure or the pain
which they produce,—is as broadly stated, and as emphatically maintained
against Protagoras by Socrates, in the dialogue, as it ever was by
Epicurus or Bentham. And yet, the general tone of Plato’s speculations
seems rather to be favourable to the opinion that certain qualities of
mind are good or evil in themselves, independently of all considerations
of pleasure or pain. That such was the predominant tendency of his mind
is, however, all that can be affirmed; it is doubtful whether he had
adopted, on the subject of the original foundation of virtue, any fixed
creed.

But we have already remarked, that when the subject-matter of the
discussion is the nature and properties of knowledge in the abstract,
the opinions of Plato seem never to vary, but to proceed from a mind
completely made up. And of this the above dialogue is an
exemplification. For, whatever are the particular arguments used as
media of proof, there appears throughout the dialogue, as there does in
the other works of Plato, a distinct aim towards this one point, the
inseparableness, or rather absolute identity, of knowledge and virtue:
an attempt to establish, that no evil is ever done (as he expresses it
both in this dialogue and elsewhere) voluntarily; but always
involuntarily, from want of knowledge, from ignorance of good and evil;
that scientific instruction is the source of all that is most desirable
for man; that whoever had knowledge to see what was good, would
certainly do it; that morals are but a branch of intelligence. It may
with some certainty be affirmed that this was Plato’s deliberate and
serious creed.

Edition: current; Page: [62]


The Phædrus

[Monthly Repository, VIII (June, and Sept., 1834), 404-20, and 633-46.
Not republished; signed “A.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography (after the
general heading cited on 38 above) as “No II. The Phædrus: part 1 in the
M.R. for June 1834 / : part 2 in the M.R. for Septb. 1834” (MacMinn,
37). In the copy in the Somerville College Library the Greek phrase
οὐσία ὄντος οὐ̑σα is indicated in pencil for insertion as a note at 74.8.

For comments on this and the other translations, see the Introduction
and Textual Introduction, xvii-xxviii and lxxx-lxxxiii above.]

this is the most miscellaneous of all the longer dialogues of Plato. The
subjects on which it touches are very numerous, and are held together by
a very slight thread of connexion. It is not a controversial dialogue,
part of it being in long discourses, while even in the part which
consists of conversations, Socrates does not combat the opinion of
Phædrus, but states his own. None of the works of Plato tends more
strongly to confirm the opinion, that the design of his speculations was
rather to recommend a particular mode of inquiry, than to inculcate
particular conclusions. Whatever in this dialogue has reference to
methods of philosophizing, (which is the case with a great and the most
instructive portion of it,) appears perfectly serious and in earnest,
while in the remainder there is an appearance of sportiveness, and
sometimes almost of mockery.

The dramatic merits of the Phædrus are very great. It may be pronounced
a model of lively and familiar conversation between two intimate
acquaintances, Athenian gentlemen in the best sense of the term,
accomplished up to the highest standard of their age.

The dialogue derives an additional interest, from its containing, in the
form of an allegory, those doctrines, or rather ideas, on the subject of
love, which, by giving rise to the vulgar expression “Platonic love,”
have made the name of Plato familiar to the ear of thousands, who
otherwise might probably never have heard of his existence.

Socrates meets his friend Phædrus, coming from a visit to Lysias, the
celebrated orator, and going out to walk. He asks Phædrus, what was the
Edition: current; Page: [63] subject of discourse between him and
Lysias; and Phædrus promises to give him an account of it if he will
accompany him in his walk.

Socrates having complied, Phædrus tells him that Lysias had read to the
company a written discourse on the subject of love, πειρώμενόν τινα τω̑ν
καλω̑ν, οὐχ ὑπὸ ἐραστου̑ δέ, i. e. a letter, or speech, (whichever we
choose to call it,) containing a proposal, of a nature which would
commonly be called an amatory one, but without professing to be in love.
This last circumstance, continues Phædrus, is the cream of the matter;
for he maintains, that one who is not in love ought to be preferred, as
to the matter in question, to one who is. “He is a fine fellow,” said
Socrates: “I wish he would maintain that a poor man should be preferred
to a rich man, an old man to a young, and so on, going through all the
qualities which I and most others possess: his discourse would then be
of great public utility.” He then presses Phædrus very earnestly to
relate the discourse: Phædrus pretends want of memory, and coquets a
little, whereupon Socrates rallies him, and says, that he knows he is
dying to relate it, and sooner than lose the opportunity would end by
compelling him to listen. Phædrus was preparing accordingly to give an
account of the discourse, when Socrates asks him to let him see what he
has got under his cloak; which turns out to be the very discourse
itself. When the mirth and pleasantry excited by this discovery have
subsided, they agree to read the manuscript together, as soon as they
can find a convenient place for sitting down.

As they are walking along the banks of the Ilissus in quest of such a
spot, Phædrus asks Socrates whether this is the place from which Boreas
is said to have carried off Oreithya. “No,” replied Socrates, “it is a
little lower down.”—“Do you believe this story,” asked Phædrus, “to be
true?”—“It would be nothing extraordinary,” said Socrates, “if, like the
wise men, I disbelieved it. I might then say, that the north wind blew
this girl over the adjoining rocks while she was diverting herself in
the meadows, and that for this reason she was said to have been carried
off by Boreas. According to my notion, however, all these things are
very entertaining, but they would make life exceedingly laborious and
troublesome: for one would next have to explain the Centaurs, and then
the Chimæra, and a whole crowd of Gorgons and Pegasuses; which if one
were to disbelieve, and attempt to bring back to probability, it would
be the business of a life. I have not leisure for these things, and I
will tell you the reason: I am not yet able, according to the Delphic
injunction, to know myself; and it appears to me very ridiculous, while
ignorant of myself, to inquire into what I am not concerned in. I
therefore leave these things alone, and believe with the vulgar; not
searching into such matters, but into myself, and inquiring whether I am
a beast, of a more complicated structure and more savage Edition:
current; Page: [64] than Typhon, or a tamer and simpler animal, whose
nature partakes of divinity.”

Saying these things, they arrive at the spot which Phædrus had selected
for sitting down to read the manuscript. Socrates begins to look about
him with wonder, and praises the beauty of the place. Phædrus laughs at
him, and tells him that he is more like a stranger than a native, and
never goes out of the town at all. Socrates begs to be pardoned for the
omission; “for,” says he, “I like to learn: the fields and trees cannot
teach me any thing, the men in the town can. But you have found a cure
for this fault of mine: for, as they lead hungry cattle by carrying a
branch of a tree before them, so, by holding a book in your hand, you
might make me follow you all over Attica.”

After these preliminaries Phædrus reads the discourse; which is in the
form of a love-letter, if that can be called a love-letter which
disclaims love. The following is the substance, and almost an exact
translation:

“You know how it is with me, and that I think this affair would be
advantageous to us: but I claim, not to be rejected because I do not
love you. A lover, when his desire ceases, repents of all that he has
done for you: the other has no cause for repentance, for the good he
does you was not done from irresistible impulse, but from choice, and
deliberation. A lover, too, reckons up the benefits he has conferred
upon you, the trouble and anxiety he has undergone for your sake, the
damage which he has suffered in his private affairs by reason of his
love, and thinks that by all this he has long ago made a sufficient
return to you for your favours; but he who does not love, can neither
pretend to have neglected his own concerns on account of his love, nor
to have undergone labour or anxiety, nor to have quarrelled with his
relations, so that nothing is left but to be eager and assiduous in
doing whatever will give you pleasure. Again, if it is a reason for
valuing a lover, that he is more attached to the person whom he loves
than to any person else, and is ready both by word and deed to incur the
enmity of others, in order to gratify the object of his love, it clearly
follows that if he should afterwards love another, he will do as much
for that other, and will be willing, for the gratification of the other,
to quarrel with his first love. And how can it be reasonable to grant
such a favour to one who is under a calamity, which they who know what
it is will not even attempt to cure? for the men themselves confess that
they are in an unsound state of mind, and know their own folly, but
cannot conquer it. How then can they, when they come to their senses,
judge that to be well done which they determined upon when in such a
state? Further, if you select from among your lovers even the very best,
your choice must be made from a small number; but if you choose from
among all persons whatever, except lovers, the one who is most suitable
to yourself, there is a much greater chance of your finding a person
deserving of your attachment.

Edition: current; Page: [65]
“If, moreover, you stand in awe of common opinion, and fear lest if it
be known it should be a reproach to you; a lover, expecting to be
thought as happy by others as he thinks himself, cannot restrain himself
from boasting, and making a display to the world that he has not
laboured in vain: but he who is not in love has command of himself, and
can choose what is really best, in preference to the mere opinion of
men. Many persons must unavoidably see and hear of the lovers who run
after you, and if you are even seen talking with them, it is supposed
that there either is, or shortly will be, an intrigue between you: but
from your associating with a person who is not in love, no such
inference will be drawn, because people are aware that you must
associate with somebody, either from friendship or for some other
pleasure. Further, if you are alarmed by a consideration of the
instability of all attachments, and by the reflection that under any
other circumstances a quarrel would be an equal misfortune to both, but
after you have given away what you most value, it is a most severe
calamity to you; then you have reason to be more especially fearful of
lovers: for they are most easily offended, and consider the slightest
thing an injury to them. For which reason they wish to divert the object
of their attachment from all other society; fearing those who have
wealth, lest they should outbid them in money; those who have
instruction, lest they should outshine them in intellect; and, in short,
fearing all who have any desirable possession or quality whatever.
Wishing, therefore, to alienate you from all such persons, they leave
you without friends; and if you endeavour to make friends, and so
provide better for your own interest, you will provoke them. But those
who are not in love, but have obtained their wishes on account of their
good qualities, are not jealous of those who seek your society, but, on
the contrary, dislike those who care not for it, thinking that you are
scorned by the latter, but benefited by the former; so that you are more
likely to make friends than enemies through their means.

“Lovers, moreover, frequently desire your person before they are
acquainted with your manners and character, so that it is uncertain
whether they will continue attached to you when their desires are at an
end: but those who are not in love, but have obtained your favours in
consequence of previous friendship, are not likely to be less your
friends in consequence of the favours they have received, but rather to
consider those favours as a pledge of future friendship. And, moreover,
it is more for your mental improvement to comply with my wishes, than
with those of a lover; for lovers praise all you say or do, however
unreasonable, partly from fear of your displeasure, and partly because
their own judgment is warped by their desire. For such is the effect of
love: if unfortunate, it makes that a source of pain which gives no pain
to other persons; if fortunate, it makes the lover applaud, in the
person he loves, what is really no cause for satisfaction: so Edition:
current; Page: [66] that lovers deserve our pity far more than our envy.
But if you yield yourself to me, I shall not serve you for present
pleasure, but for future good; not over-mastered by love, but retaining
command over myself; not vehemently provoked by slight causes, but
tardily excited to moderate resentment even by great provocations;
pardoning all involuntary offence, and endeavouring to dissuade you from
that which is voluntary: these are the signs of what will be a lasting
friendship. But if you suppose that there cannot be a strong attachment,
save from love, consider that if that were true, we should not love our
children, nor our parents, nor possess faithful friends, who have become
so from other causes than sexual desire. It may be said that you should
confer favours upon those most who need them most. But, if this were
true, it would follow that you should select for the objects of your
benefits, not the best, but the most destitute; and that in your
entertainments you should invite, not your friends, but beggars and the
hungry: for they will come the most eagerly, and will be most delighted
and most grateful, and will invoke innumerable blessings upon your head.

“But the persons fittest to receive favours are not they who most need
them, but they who can make the best return: not lovers only, but all
who are worthy; not they who will merely enjoy you during the season of
your beauty, but they who when you grow old will continue their
benefits; not they who will ostentatiously display their successes to
others, but they who will preserve a modest silence; not they who will
pay court to you for a short time, but they who will remain your friends
during your whole life; not they who when their desires have ceased,
will look out for an excuse to quarrel with you, but they whose
excellence will then be most perceived, when their pleasures are over.
Remember, then, all these things; and consider that lovers are
continually remonstrated with by their friends, as giving in to an evil
practice, but he who loves not, was never for that reason censured by
any friend, as consulting ill for his own affairs. You may perhaps ask
me, whether I advise you to gratify all who do not love you? But neither
do I think that a lover would bid you comply with the desires of all
your lovers, for it would diminish the value of the favour to him who
receives it, and would increase the difficulty of concealment. Now, harm
ought not to arise to either party from the connexion, but advantage to
both.”

Having read this discourse, Phædrus asks Socrates whether he does not
admire it exceedingly, both in other respects, and for the excellence of
the language? Socrates replies, “Wonderfully so: for I was looking at
you all the while, and you seemed so delighted, that I, thinking you
know more about these things than I do, was delighted along with you.”
Phædrus begged that there might be a truce with jesting, and that
Socrates would tell him seriously, whether he thought there was any
other man in Greece who Edition: current; Page: [67] could say so much,
and all of it so excellent, on the same subject? “What!” said Socrates:
“must we praise the discourse for the value of the thoughts, as well as
for the language? For my part, I only attended to it as a specimen of
composition, for I did not suppose that Lysias himself would imagine
that he was equal to the proper treatment of the subject. And, moreover,
he seemed to me to repeat the same thing two or three times over, as if
he had not a very great deal to say: perhaps he did not mind this, but
only desired to show that he could say the very same thing in several
ways, and always excellently.”

Phædrus did not like this mode of treating the discourse, and persisted
that nothing which was fit to be said had been left out, and that nobody
could say any thing more or better on the same subject, after what
Lysias had said. This Socrates declared he could not concede; or many
old writers, both men and women, would rise up and bear witness against
him. “Who?” asked Phædrus.—“I cannot say,” rejoined Socrates, “but I
must have read something in Sappho, or Anacreon, or some other writer,
for I find myself quite full of matter which I could repeat to you on
the subject, nowise inferior to what you have just now read. Knowing my
own ignorance, I am certain that I could not have thought of all this by
myself, I must therefore have learnt it from somebody else, but from my
silliness I have even forgotten from whom.” Phædrus insisted that he
should prove his assertion, by speaking as much on the same subject as
was in the manuscript, and better in quality. “Do not suppose,” said
Socrates, “that I affirm Lysias to have missed the mark altogether, or
pretend that it is possible to treat the subject omitting every thing
which he has said. How, do you suppose, would it be possible to argue
that one who is not in love should be favoured in preference to a lover,
abstaining altogether from praising reasonableness and sanity of mind,
and from blaming the want of it. This, any one who treats the subject
cannot avoid saying, and nothing could be said to the purpose without
it. But this kind of things must be taken for granted, and of such we
must not praise the invention, but the arrangement; while of those
things which, instead of being impossible to miss, are difficult to
find, we may praise the invention and the arrangement too.”—Phædrus
assents, and says he will allow him to make use of that one principle of
Lysias, that a lover is in a less sane state of mind than one who is not
in love: but insists that he shall compose a discourse, all the rest of
which shall be longer and better than the rest of the discourse of
Lysias. Socrates now pretends to have been in jest, and after playfully
refusing for some time, which gives rise to some very amusing
conversation, he in a mock heroic manner invokes the Muses, and begins
to relate the following as a discourse actually held on an occasion of
the kind supposed:

“There is but one mode of beginning for those who would deliberate well;
Edition: current; Page: [68] viz. to know what the thing, about which
they are to deliberate, really is. The vulgar are not aware that they
are ignorant of the essence of every thing: conceiving themselves,
therefore, to know the inmost nature of the thing which they are about
to discuss, they do not come to a mutual explanation respecting it at
the commencement of their inquiry, but pass it over, and proceed to
employ merely probable arguments. That we may not fall into the error
which we condemn in others, let us—who have to inquire whether a lover,
or one who is not a lover, should be preferably indulged—begin by
ascertaining what love is, and what is its operation; that we may keep
this in view, when we subsequently examine whether it produces good or
hurt.

“That love is a kind of desire, is clear to all; on the other hand, that
persons who are not in love may have physical desire, we know. How then
do we distinguish the lover from him who is not in love? We must
consider that in each of us there are two principles* which lead and
govern us; the one, a natural desire for pleasure; the other, an
acquired judgment, which seeks that which is best. These two principles
sometimes are in harmony with each other, sometimes in opposition; and
in the latter case sometimes one is the stronger, sometimes the other.
Now, Judgment, which guides us, by means of reason, to the best, when it
is the superior in strength, receives the name of Prudence:† Desire,
which drags us irrationally to pleasure, when it governs us, is called
Incontinence.‡ Incontinence, again, has many names, for there are many
species of it; and whichsoever of these predominates, gives its own
name, and that an opprobrious one, to the person whom it rules. If the
desire of the pleasures of the palate predominates over reason, and over
the other desires, it is called gluttony, and the person who is affected
by it is termed a glutton: if the desire of intoxication similarly
preponderates, we know what name it receives. We now see what that
desire is, respecting which we are inquiring. The desire which (being
independent of reason, and being victorious over right judgment) tends
towards the pleasure of beauty, is called love.”

Here Socrates interrupts himself, and jocularly pretends to be inspired
by the deities of the spot; “what I am now speaking,” says he, “is not
far removed from dithyrambics.”

“We have now,” continues he, “settled what the thing is, about which we
are speaking; and keeping this in view, we can inquire what benefit or
hurt Edition: current; Page: [69] arises respectively from a lover, and
from one who is not a lover, to the person who complies with their
desires. Now, he who is governed by desire, and the slave of pleasure,
must of necessity attempt to make the object of his love a source of as
much pleasure to him as possible. But, to a person who is in an unsound
state, that is pleasant which opposes to him no resistance; that which
is his equal or his superior, is disagreeable to him. A lover,
therefore, cannot endure that the object of his passion should be either
superior or equal to him: he will strive all he can to make it inferior
and feebler. Now, the ignorant are feebler than the wise; the cowardly,
than the brave; he who is unable to speak, than an orator; a slow
person, than a ready one. A lover, therefore, must of necessity rejoice
that the object of his love should labour under these disadvantages, and
must do all he can to superinduce them if they do not already exist, or
else he will be deprived of what gives him immediate pleasure. He must
of necessity be jealous; and the object of his love will suffer great
evil from him, by being withheld from much useful intercourse; and above
all, from that which produces the greatest wisdom—philosophy. From this,
a lover must above all things withhold the person whom he loves, lest,
in consequence of it, he himself should be despised; and must endeavour
all he can to make that person be ignorant of every thing, and by
depending for every thing upon the lover, be a source of the greatest
amount of pleasure to him, and of evil to the beloved object itself.

“If a man who is in love, is so ill a superintendent and associate in
the affairs of the mind, he is not less so in what concerns the body. He
who prefers the pleasant to the good, will prefer a habit of body soft
and relaxed, bred up, not in the clear sunshine, but in the shade,
unused to labour and hardy exercise, accustomed only to delicate and
effeminate living; such a state of body, in short, as in all great
exigencies would give confidence to an enemy, fear and anxiety to a
friend, and to the lover himself.

“Every one, but a lover especially, must see, that he would wish the
person he loves to be destitute of all which is most dear, most
affectionate, and most divine: to be deprived of father, mother,
relations, and friends, lest they should censure and obstruct the
intercourse with him; to be destitute of property, those who possess it
being neither so easily obtained, nor, when obtained, so easily managed:
to be unmarried, childless, and to remain for as long a period as
possible undomesticated and without a home, in order to remain as long
as possible subservient to his pleasures. Again; there are many other
things which are in themselves bad; but in most of them there is an
admixture of immediate pleasure: A flatterer is a most dangerous and
mischievous animal, but nature has mixed up in him, a pleasure not
entirely illiberal; a courtezan, and many other of the most pernicious
things, are in daily intercourse the most pleasant; but a lover is
Edition: current; Page: [70] not only pernicious, but the most
unpleasant of all things in daily intercourse. For it is an old saying,
that persons of the same age like one another: equality of age,
producing similarity of tastes, causes friendship, by reason of
resemblance: but even of their intimacy, there is such a thing as
satiety; and moreover, in every thing, and to all persons, what they
cannot get rid of, becomes a burthen. Now, both these are inconveniences
which are suffered above all from a lover; who is likely to be much
superior in age to the object of his love, and, hurried by an
irresistible impulse, is so assiduous in running after and engrossing
the person whom he loves, that he can in no way be got rid of.

“And not only is he thus disagreeable and detrimental while he loves,
but unfaithful when he has ceased to love. He was only endured in the
first instance, on account of his many promises and vows of future
benefits. When, however, these are to be fulfilled, he is changed, and
has recovered his reason. The person whom he loves, not knowing this,
reminds him of his past words and deeds: he is ashamed to say that he
has changed, and knows not how, when in his senses, to perform the
promises which he made and swore to when in a state of temporary
madness, lest, acting as he did before, he should again be what he then
was. He therefore flies off from his promises, and from the society of
the person whom he formerly loved; who has then the ungrateful task of
pursuing, and resenting; having been unfortunately ignorant that the
attachment of a lover is not a feeling of good will, but an appetite
which seeks merely its own gratification, and that the love of a lover
is like that of the wolf to the lamb.”

Here Socrates breaks off his discourse: and Phædrus tells him, that as
yet he has only done half what he had undertaken; he has only censured
the lover, and not pointed out the good which arises from an intimacy
with one who is not a lover; why therefore does he stop? Socrates
jocularly answers, “Did you not perceive that I had already got beyond
dithyrambics, and into heroics, and that too, when vituperating,” (for
which purpose the poets generally employed the dithyrambic measure).
“What do you suppose would happen if I were to commence a panegyric? I
should be in a state of absolute enthusiasm; completely inspired by the
nymphs of the place, to whose influence you have premeditatedly exposed
me. I will be satisfied with saying in one word, that by reversing all
that we have said against the lover, you will find all the good
qualities which distinguish the other.”

Having discoursed to the above effect, Socrates pretended to be going
away, lest Phædrus, whom he rallies upon his extreme fondness for an
argument, should compel him to make another discourse; but presently he
affects to perceive what he calls the divine and customary sign, which,
he says, is continually stopping him when he is about to undertake any
thing; Edition: current; Page: [71] and to hear a voice, which will not
allow him to depart, until he has expiated an offence which he has
committed against the divinity. “I am a prophet,” he continues; “not a
very good one, but (like a man who writes a bad hand-writing) good
enough for my own use. The soul is in some sort a prophet; and mine
pricked me while I was speaking, and made me even then afraid that I was
offending the gods for the sake of honour among men; and I now perceive
what my offence is. You have yourself brought, and have made me utter,
two most horrible and impious discourses. Is not Love the son of Venus,
and one of the gods?”—“So it is said,” replied Phædrus.—“Not by Lysias,
however,” rejoins Socrates, “nor by your speech, which you by your
incantations contrived to utter through my lips. If Love is, as he is, a
god, or something divine, he cannot be anything evil. Both our speeches,
however, represented him as such. I therefore must purify myself; and,
as Stesichorus, who had been struck blind like Homer for calumniating
Helen, recovered his sight by making a recantation, I will make my
Palinodia, more wisely, before I have yet suffered anything from the
anger of the god whom I have maligned. Do you not think, indeed, that
any person of a generous and a civilized disposition, who either loves
or has loved, if he were to hear us saying that lovers contract strong
enmities from slight causes, and behave jealously and injuriously
towards the object of their love, would suppose that we had been bred up
at sea, and had never seen any liberal and generous attachment; and
would be far indeed from admitting the justice of the censures which we
have cast upon Love?”—“Perhaps,” said Phædrus, “he would.”—“For this
reason,” said Socrates, “and for fear of the god himself, I will
endeavour to efface my reproaches by a panegyric; and I would advise
Lysias to make haste and do the same.

“It is a fallacy to maintain that one who loves not, should be favoured
in preference to a lover, because the one is in his senses, and the
other not. If madness were always and of necessity an evil, this would
be very just; but it happens that the very greatest of blessings come to
us through madness; madness given, it is true, by the divinity. The
prophetesses at Delphi and Dodona, and elsewhere, have rendered to
Greece, both individually and publicly, when frantic, the greatest
services, but none that I know of when in their sober senses. There
would be no end to the enumeration of those who have foretold future
events correctly, prophesying by a frenzy inspired from heaven. Those
ancients who invented our language, certainly thought madness no
disgrace, or they would not have given to the noblest of arts, that of
predicting the future, the name of μανική (madness,) which we have
ignorantly corrupted into μαντική, (prophesy). In like manner, the
inquiry into the future, when conducted by those who are in their
senses, by observation of the flight of birds, and other signs, received
from the Edition: current; Page: [72] ancients (to indicate that it
operated by means of thought and intellect) the name οἰονοϊστικη,* which
the moderns have corrupted into οἰωνιστική, (the science of omens). In
so much then as the prophetic art excels that of augury and omens, in so
much do the ancients testify that the madness which comes from God,
excels the wisdom which comes from men. Many again, on whom, by the
anger of the gods, great calamities and diseases have fallen, have been
cured by the supervention of madness, which operating upon them in a
manner similar to divination, indicated to them the proper prayers and
adorations of the gods, by which they were purified, and became free
from their previous evils. A third kind of madness is that, which,
coming from the Muses, awakens the mind, and stirs it up to pour itself
forth in odes and other kinds of poetry; and by adorning the deeds of
the ancients, instructs their posterity. For he who, without madness
inspired by the Muses, knocks at the door of poetry, thinking that he
can become an adequate poet by mere art, fails of his purpose, and his
poetry is thrown into the shade by that of the inspired madmen.

“Such, and yet more, are the good works which proceed from madness
inspired by the gods. Let us not, therefore, be disturbed by any
argument which inculcates the preference of a sane above an insane mind.
Let us first require proof, that love is not sent by the gods, for the
benefit both of the lover and of the person loved. We ourselves will
show that, on the contrary, this kind of madness is given by the gods
for the greatest possible felicity of mankind. The proof will be very
unsatisfactory to merely clever people, but convincing to the really
wise.† We must, with this view, first institute an inquiry concerning
the soul, both of men and of gods; what are its affections, and what its
acts.

“All souls are immortal; for that which is always in motion must be
immortal. (That which is set in motion by something else, may cease to
be moved, and may therefore cease to live. But that which is
self-moving, as it never quits itself, never ceases moving, but is the
source and beginning of motion to all other things which are moved. But
that which is a beginning, is not itself generated: a thing which is
generated may be traced up to a beginning, but that beginning would not
be the beginning if it could be traced to anything prior. Not being
generated, it is not susceptible of destruction; for, if the beginning
were destroyed, every thing which is generated from it would be
destroyed with it; if that which is self-moving were destroyed, since it
is the cause of all other motion, there would be no motion whatever.)
Since, therefore, that which is self-moving is immortal, immortality is
the essence of life; for, all bodies which require to be moved Edition:
current; Page: [73] from without, are termed lifeless; those which are
moved from within are said to have life. Life, therefore, is the
principle of self-motion, and is consequently ungenerated, and immortal.
Life is immortal; or in other words, the soul is immortal.*

“Respecting the immortality of the soul, this is sufficient. About its
form, we shall speak as follows. What it is, would be the matter of a
long inquiry, and would require divine aid; but to show what it
resembles, is in human power, and requires not so long an exposition. We
may compare it to a chariot, with a pair of winged horses and a driver.
In the souls of the gods, the horses and the driver are entirely good:
in other souls, only partially so, one of the horses excellent, the
other vicious. The business, therefore, of the driver, is extremely
difficult and troublesome.

“Let us now attempt to show how some living beings came to be spoken of
as mortal, and others as immortal. All souls are employed in taking care
of the things which are inanimate; and travel about the whole of heaven,
in various forms. Now, when the soul is perfect, and has wings, it is
carried aloft, and helps to administer the entire universe; but the soul
which loses its wings, drops down until it catches hold of something
solid, in which it takes up its residence; and having a dwelling of
clay, which seems to be self-moving on account of the soul which is in
it, the two together are called an animal, and mortal. The phrase,
immortal animal, arises not from any correct understanding, but from a
fiction: never having seen, nor being able to comprehend a deity, men
conceived an immortal being, having a body as well as a soul, united
together for all eternity. Let these things, then, be as it pleases God;
but let us next state from what cause a soul becomes unfledged.

“It is the nature of wings to lift up heavy bodies towards the
habitation of the gods; and of all things which belong to the body,
wings are that which most partakes of the divine. The divine includes
the beautiful, the wise, the good, and every thing of that nature. By
these, the wings of the soul are nourished and increased; by the
contraries of these, they are destroyed.

“Jupiter, and the other gods, divided into certain bands, travel about
in their winged chariots, ordering and attending to all things, each
according to his appointed function; and all who will, and who can,
follow them. When they go to take their repasts, they journey up hill,
towards the summit of the vault of heaven. The chariots of the gods,
being in exact equilibrium, and therefore easily guided, perform this
journey easily, but all others with difficulty; for one of the two
horses, being of inferior nature, Edition: current; Page: [74] when he
has not been exceedingly well trained by the driver, weighs down the
vehicle, and impels it towards the earth.

“The souls which are called immortal, (viz. the gods,) when they reach
the summit, go through, and standing upon the convex outside of heaven,
are carried round and round by its revolution, and see the things which
lie beyond the heavens. No poet has ever celebrated these
super-celestial things, nor ever will celebrate them as they deserve.
This region is the seat of Existence itself:* Real Existence,
colourless, figureless, and intangible Existence, which is visible only
to Mind, the charioteer of the soul, and which forms the subject of Real
Knowledge. The minds of the gods, which are fed by pure knowledge, and
all other thoroughly well-ordered minds, contemplate for a time this
universe of ‘Being’ per se, and are delighted and nourished by the
contemplation, until the revolution of the heavens bring them back to
the same point. In this circumvolution, they contemplate Justice itself,
Temperance itself, and Knowledge, not that knowledge which has a
generation or a beginning, not that which exists in a subject which is
any of what we term beings, but that Knowledge which exists in Being in
general; in that which really Is. After thus contemplating all real
existences, and being nourished thereby, these souls again sink into the
interior of the heavens, and repose.

“Such is the life of the gods. Of other souls, those which best follow
the gods, and most resemble them, barely succeed in lifting the head of
the charioteer into the parts beyond the heavens, and being carried
round by the circumvolution, are enabled with difficulty to contemplate
this universe of Self-Existences. Others, being encumbered by the
horses, sometimes rising and sometimes sinking, are enabled to see some
Existences only. The remainder only struggle to elevate themselves, and
by the unskilfulness of their drivers, coming continually into
collision, are lamed, or break their wings, and after much labour go
away without accomplishing their purpose, and return to feed upon mere
Opinion.

“The motive of this great anxiety to view the super-celestial plain of
Truth, is, that the proper food of the soul is derived from thence, and
in particular, the wings, by which the soul is made light and carried
aloft, are nourished upon it. Now it is an inviolable law that any soul,
which, placing itself in the train of the gods, and journeying along
with them, obtains a sight of any of these self-existent Realities,
remains exempt from all harm until the next circumvolution; and if it
can contrive to effect this every time, it is for ever safe and
uninjured. But if, being unable to elevate itself to the necessary
height, it altogether fails of seeing these Realities, and, being
weighed down by vice and oblivion, loses its wings and falls to the
earth, it Edition: current; Page: [75] enters into and animates some
Body. It never enters, at the first generation, into the body of a brute
animal; but that which has seen most, enters into the body of a person
who will become a lover of wisdom, or a lover of beauty, or a person
addicted to music, or to love: the next in rank, into that of a monarch
who reigns according to law, or a warrior, or a man of talents for
command: the third, into a person qualified to administer the state, and
manage his family affairs, or carry on a gainful occupation: the fourth,
into a person fond of hard labour and bodily exercises, or skilled in
the prevention and curing of bodily diseases: the fifth, into a prophet,
or a teacher of religious ceremonies: the sixth, into a poet, or a
person addicted to any other of the imitative arts: the seventh, into a
husbandman or an artificer: the eighth, into a sophist, or a courtier of
the people: the ninth, into a despot and usurper. And in all these
different fortunes they who conduct themselves justly will obtain next
time a more eligible lot; they who conduct themselves unjustly, a worse.

“The soul never returns to its pristine state in less than 10,000 years,
for its wings do not grow in a shorter time; except only the soul of one
who philosophizes with sincerity, or who loves with philosophy. Such
souls, after three periods of 1000 years, if they choose thrice in
succession this kind of life, recover their wings in the three
thousandth year, and depart. The other souls, at the termination of
their first life, are judged, and having received their sentence, are
either sent for punishment into the places of execution under the earth,
or are elevated to a place in heaven, in which they are rewarded
according to the life which they led while here. In either case they are
called back on the thousandth year, to choose or draw lots for a new
life. Then a human soul often passes into the body of a beast, and that
of a beast, if it has ever been human, passes again into the body of a
man. For a soul which has never seen the Truth at all, cannot enter into
the human form, it being necessary that man should be able to apprehend
things according to kinds,* which kinds are composed of many perceptions
combined by reason into one. Now this mode of apprehending is neither
more nor less than the recollecting of those things which the soul
formerly saw when it journeyed along with the gods, and, disregarding
what we now call beings, applied itself to the apprehension of Real
Being. It is for this reason that the soul of the philosopher is
re-fledged in a shorter period than others: for it constantly, to the
best of its power, occupies itself in trying to recollect those things
which the gods contemplated, and by the contemplation of which they are
gods; by which means, being lifted out of, and above, Edition: current;
Page: [76] human cares and interests, he is, by the vulgar, considered
as mad, while in reality he is inspired.

“It will now appear, on consideration, that the fourth kind of madness
of which we were before speaking, the madness of one who is a lover of
beauty, is the best and most beneficial of all the enthusiasms which are
inspired from heaven. For, as we have already said, every human soul has
actually seen the Real Existences, or it would not have come into a
human shape. But it is not easy for all of them to call to mind what
they then saw: those especially, which saw that region for a short time
only, and those which, having fallen to the earth, were so unfortunate
as to be turned to injustice, and consequent oblivion of the sacred
things which were seen by them in their prior state. Few, therefore,
remain who are adequate to the recollection of those things. These few,
when they see here any image or resemblance of the things which are
there, receive a shock like a thunderbolt, and are in a manner taken out
of themselves; but from deficiency of comprehension, they know not what
it is which so affects them. Now, the likenesses which exist here of
Justice and Temperance, and the other things which the soul honours, do
not possess any splendour; and a few persons only, with great
difficulty, by the aid of dull, blunt, material organs, perceive the
terrestrial likenesses of those qualities, and recognise them. But
Beauty was not only most splendid when it was seen by us forming part of
the heavenly procession or quire, but here also the likeness of it comes
to us through the most acute and clear of our senses, that of sight, and
with a splendour which no other of the terrestrial images of
super-celestial existences possess. They, then, who are not fresh from
heaven, or who have been corrupted, are not vehemently impelled towards
that Beauty which is aloft, when they see that upon earth which is
called by its name; they do not, therefore, venerate and worship it, but
give themselves up to physical pleasure, after the manner of a
quadruped. But they who are fresh from those divine objects of
contemplation, and who have formerly contemplated them much, when they
see a godlike countenance or form, in which celestial beauty is imaged
and well imitated, are first struck with a holy awe, and then,
approaching, venerate this beautiful object as a god, and, if they were
not afraid of the reputation of too raving a madness, would erect
altars, and perform sacrifices to it. And the warmth and genial
influence derived from the atmosphere which beauty generates around
itself, entering through the eyes, softens and liquefies the inveterate
induration, which coats and covers up the parts in the vicinity of the
wings, and prevents them from growing: this being melted, the wings
begin to germinate and increase, and this, like the growing of the
teeth, produces an itching and irritation which disturbs the whole frame
of the soul. When, therefore, by the contemplation of the beautiful
object, the induration is Edition: current; Page: [77] softened, and the
wings begin to shoot, the soul is relieved from its pain and rejoices;
but when that object is absent, the liquefied substance hardens again,
and closes up the young shoots of the wings, which consequently boil up
and throb, and throw the soul into a state of turbulence and rage, and
will neither allow it to sleep nor remain at rest, until it can again
see the beautiful object, and be relieved. For this reason it never
willingly leaves that object, but for its sake deserts parents and
brothers and friends, and neglects its patrimony, and despises all
established usages and decorums on which it valued itself before. And
this affection is Love.

“Now, those who in their former state followed in the train of Jupiter,
can, when seized by love, more patiently bear the burthens occasioned by
it; but those who served and followed Mars, when they fall in love, and
think themselves wronged by the person whom they love, are ready to
resort to violence, and immolate both the loved person and themselves.
And every other soul, both in its loves and in all its other pursuits,
follows to the best of its power the example and model of the god on
whom it formerly attended. But those who attended on Jupiter seek to
have for the object of their love one who resembles Jupiter in soul—one
who is a philosopher, and fitted by nature to lead; and strive all they
can that the object of their love, if not so already, shall become so.
And if they themselves have not before applied to study, they do so, and
endeavouring to image to their recollection the god to whom they were
attached, model their habits and dispositions, as far as is in human
power, from him. And ascribing this change in themselves to the object
of their love, they become still fonder of that object, and communicate
to it a share of what they themselves draw from Jupiter, and make the
beloved person resemble as much as possible the god whom they imitate.
In like manner, those who had been attendants upon Juno look out for a
person of a regal disposition; those of Apollo, and all the other gods,
similarly look out for an object of love who is as like their god as
possible, and if not so already they endeavour that it shall become so.

“We formerly distinguished the soul into three parts, two of them
resembling horses, the third a charioteer. One of these horses we said
was good, the other vicious. The better of the two is an upright noble
animal, a lover of honour, sensible to shame, and obeying the word of
the driver without the lash. The other is crooked, headlong, fiery,
insolent, deaf, and with difficulty yielding even to whip and spur.*
Now, when the driver is inflamed by love and desire for some beautiful
human being, the tractable Edition: current; Page: [78] horse holds
himself back, and restrains himself all he can from attempting any
sensual enjoyment of the beloved object; but the other, setting whip and
rein at defiance, struggles on, and compels his companion and the driver
to rush towards the desired object, and consent to unchaste intercourse.
When they come into its presence, and the charioteer, beholding it, is
reminded of the ideal beauty which he has formerly seen, and sees it
with his mind’s eye joined with Continence and Purity in the
super-celestial region, he is struck dumb, and falling backward in
adoration, draws back the reins so violently, that both horses are
forced back upon their haunches, the one willingly and unresisting, the
other with a great struggle. After many vain attempts, in which the
vicious beast suffers great torture, he is at length subdued and
humbled, and when he comes into the presence of the beloved object, is
so overcome with fear as to be easily governed.

“The mind of the lover being brought into this state, his constant
attendance upon, and as it were worship of, the beloved object, in time
inspires the latter with a corresponding affection: and the same stream
of beauty and desire which has entered into the soul of the lover
through his eyes, rebounds as from a wall when he is full, and enters
into the person from whom it at first proceeded, in whom it in like
manner melts the induration about the roots of the wings, and enables
them to sprout. Thus both partake of love; and if, by orderly habits of
life, and by philosophy, the better part of their nature retains the
ascendency, they lead a happy and united life, retaining command over
themselves, being in strict subjection so far as regards the vicious
part of their souls, and in full freedom in respect of the virtuous
part. And after their death, being light and winged, and having achieved
one of the three great victories, they have accomplished the greatest
good which either human wisdom or divine madness can confer upon a human
creature. But if their mode of life is more rude, and they are attached
to the pursuit of honour rather than of wisdom, perhaps in a moment of
forgetfulness the incontinent horse of each of them, finding their souls
unguarded, may bring them together, and cause them to accomplish what
common persons celebrate as the summit of happiness. And this having
been done, they subsequently persevere in the same intercourse, but
sparingly, as doing what is not approved by the whole of their minds.
These persons, too, are dear to one another, although less so than those
of whom we formerly spoke: and both while their love continues and when
it has ceased, they consider themselves as having given and received the
greatest of pledges, which it would be impious to violate by becoming
alienated. When these persons die, they quit the body, without wings
indeed, but having them in an incipient state, and they have therefore
no trifling reward for their love; for those who have once commenced the
journey towards heaven cannot again descend into the subterranean
darkness, Edition: current; Page: [79] but live happily together in the
clear light, and when they recover their wings, recover them together.

“Such is the attachment of a lover. But that of a person who is not a
lover, being a mere compound of mortal prudence, is sparing and no more
than mortal in what it dispenses: it produces in the soul of the person
who is the object of attachment, nothing but illiberality,* which the
vulgar praise as virtue. A soul so affected will be tossed about for
9000 years, on the earth and under it.”

Here Socrates terminates his long discourse, winding it up by a prayer
to Love, to whom he offers the discourse as a Palinodia; and whose
pardon he implores for having blasphemed against him, and lays the whole
blame upon Lysias, whose mind he beseeches the god to turn to
philosophy.

Phædrus warmly applauded this discourse, which he allowed to be greatly
superior to that of Lysias. “I am afraid,” said he, “that Lysias would
appear but poor, even if he attempted to write another speech against
it. And, by the way, one of our politicians the other day inveighing
against him, reproached him through the whole of his invective with
being a λογογράϕος, or speech-writer. Perhaps, therefore, he may, from
care of his own estimation, give up the practice.” Socrates laughed, and
told Phædrus that he mistook his friend if he thought him so fearful of
censure. “So you think,” he added, “that the man who thus reproached him
meant what he said?”—“It seemed so,” answered Phædrus, “and you are
yourself aware that the men of importance and gravity in a state are
ashamed to write speeches, and leave written memorials of themselves
behind them, being afraid lest they should hereafter be reputed
sophists.”† Socrates replied jocularly, that on the contrary none were
fonder of leaving written memorials behind them, and of being thought
good writers, than politicians: “for when they write any thing, they are
so fond of those who applaud it, as always to name them at the very
beginning of the writing. Do not their writings always begin, Resolved
by the senate, or by the people, or by both, on the proposition of such
a one, meaning very gravely the writer himself; and does he not then go
on showing off his own wisdom to his applauders, to the end of sometimes
a very long paper? And if this be blotted out from the tablet on which
it is inscribed, do not the composer and all his friends go away
dissatisfied; and if it be thought worthy of being written and
permanently recorded, is he not pleased? and if any of these men, either
by his Edition: current; Page: [80] ascendency as an orator, or by
authority as a king, obtains the power of Lycurgus, or Solon, or Darius,
which enables him to become a writer for immortality, does he not appear
both to himself, and to posterity who read his writings, almost a god?
It is evident, therefore, that such a man, if he reproaches Lysias, does
not reproach him for being a writer. To write, therefore, is not
disgraceful. To write ill, is so. What then is the manner of writing
well or ill? Shall we ask this of Lysias, or any other writer who ever
wrote either in poetry or prose?”—“Shall we?” says Phædrus—“what else do
we live for, but for such pleasures as these? Not certainly for those
pleasures, to the enjoyment of which a previous state of pain is
necessary; which is the case with almost all the bodily pleasures; for
which reason they are justly called servile.”—“We have leisure,”
answered Socrates, “and the cicadæ who are chirping and conversing with
one another, in the trees over our heads, would despise us if we, like
the vulgar, instead of conversing, were to sleep out the hot part of the
day, being lulled by their note through vacancy of mind. They would
suppose that we were like cattle, who come down at mid-day to drink at
the stream, and fall asleep. But if they see us conversing, and passing
them by, like the Syrens, unfascinated, they will be pleased with us,
and will, perhaps, confer on us the gift which they have from the gods
to bestow upon men.”—“Have they such a gift?” asked Phædrus, “for I
never heard of it.”—“A lover of the Muses,” replied Socrates, “ought not
to be ignorant of this. It is said that the cicadæ were men, before the
Muses existed; but when the Muses were born, and song commenced, some of
the men of that time were so engrossed by delight, that they passed
their time in singing, and neglected to take food until they died. From
them the race of the cidadæ are sprung; and possess the gift from the
Muses, not to need food or drink, but to sing continually until they
die, and afterwards going to the abodes of the Muses, report to them who
among mortals gives them honour.”

Socrates and Phædrus agreed accordingly to continue their conversation,
and that the subject should be, what constituted good speaking and
writing.[*]

We left Socrates and Phædrus on the point of commencing a new inquiry,
viz., “What constitutes Good Speaking and Writing.”

“Is it not necessary,” asked Socrates, “in order to speak well, that the
speaker should in his own mind know the truth, in respect to the subject
concerning which he is to speak?”

“I have heard it said,” answered Phædrus, “that an orator need not know
Edition: current; Page: [81] what is really just, but only what will
appear so to the multitude who are to decide; and that he need not know
what is really good, or beautiful, but what will appear so: for
persuasion is produced by means of the apparent, not the true.”

“We must not,” said Socrates, “reject without examination what wise men
affirm; we must inquire whether there is anything in it.

“Suppose that I wanted to persuade you to buy a horse in order to go
forth and meet the enemy; and that we were both of us entirely ignorant
of a horse, but I happened to know of you, that you believed a horse to
be the most long-eared of all domestic animals.”—“It would be
ridiculous,” answered Phædrus.—“Not yet,” replied Socrates; “but what if
I were seriously to set about persuading you, by composing a speech on
the ass, calling it a horse, and celebrating it as the finest of animals
for domestic use, for military service, for carrying goods, and a
hundred other things?”—“It would be highly ridiculous.”—“Is it not
better to be ridiculous, than a dangerous and pernicious
friend?”—“Certainly.”—“But when an orator, being himself ignorant of
good and evil, and finding a people equally so, sets about persuading
them, not by a panegyric upon the ass under the name of the horse, but
upon Evil under the name of Good; and having studied the opinions of the
multitude, succeeds in persuading them to do what is bad instead of what
is good, what sort of a harvest do you think that an oratory of this
sort will reap?”—“But an indifferent one.”

“Perhaps, however,” resumed Socrates, “we are too severe upon oratory.
She may, perhaps, turn upon us, and say, You are trifling, my good
friends—I do not compel any one to learn to speak, who is ignorant of
the truth—I bid him learn the truth first, and resort to me
afterwards—The ground of my pretensions is, that without me, though a
man were to know all possible truths, he would be no nearer to
possessing the art of persuading.”—“And in saying this, does she not
speak truth?”—“Yes, if the arguments which are coming should testify
that she is an Art; but I in a manner hear the rustle of several
arguments approaching, which assert that she is an impostor, and no Art,
but an unartificial Routine.”—“Call these arguments forth, then, and let
us interrogate them.”—“Come forth, I beg you, and persuade Phædrus that
unless he philosophize sufficiently, he will never be capable of
speaking on any subject. Question Phædrus, and he will answer. Is not
the art of oratory, taken in a general sense, the influencing of the
mind by discourse, not merely in courts of justice and public
assemblies, but also in private life, whether on great subjects or on
small?”—“Not entirely so. It is generally on the occasion of trials in
courts of justice that men speak and write by art; and in deliberative
assemblies they speak by art: but otherwise not.”—“Have you then heard
tell only of the arts of oratory which were composed by Nestor and
Ulysses at Troy, Edition: current; Page: [82] but not those of
Palamedes?”—“No, nor of Nestor either, unless you call Gorgias Nestor,
and Thrasymachus or Theodorus Ulysses.”—“Tell me, then, what do
adversaries in a court of justice do? Do they not debate?”—“Yes.”—“About
the just and unjust?”—“Yes.”—“He who does this by art, can make the same
thing appear to the same persons, either just or unjust?”—“Yes.”—“And in
deliberative assemblies, he can make the same thing appear as he
pleases, either good for the state, or the contrary?”—“He can.”—“And do
we not know that Palamedes of Elea could speak by art, in such a manner
that his hearers should think the same things either like or unlike, one
or many, stationary or moved?”—“Yes.”—“The art of debate therefore, is
not confined to courts of justice and public assemblies; but if it be an
art, there is but one single art which, whatever be the subject of
discourse, can make all things appear similar, which are capable of so
appearing, and which, if another person does the same thing deceptively,
can expose the deception.

“Is deception more likely to happen in those things which differ much,
or in those which differ little?”—“In those which differ little.”—“You
will more easily get round from a thing to its contrary, by insensible
steps than all at once?”—“No doubt.”—“He, then, whose business it is to
deceive another, and not to be deceived himself, must know accurately
the resemblances and differences of things?”—“He must.”—“Can he, not
knowing the real nature of a thing itself, distinguish the degree of
resemblance which other things bear to that thing?”—“It is
impossible.”—“Since then, those who are deceived, and take up a false
opinion, must have been led to it by some sort of resemblance,
(verisimilitude or likeness to the truth,) it is clear, that a man
cannot bring round another by little and little, through a chain of
resemblances, from the truth to its contrary, or avoid being himself
dealt with in the same manner, unless he knows the real natures of
things; and the man who does not know the truth, but hunts after mere
opinion, has got a ridiculous and very unart-like art of speaking.”
Phædrus could not deny this; and Socrates proposed that they should look
again at the discourse of Lysias, and see whether it contained evidence
of art or no. Phædrus assented, saying, that as yet they were somewhat
bare, not having a sufficiency of examples. “It is perhaps lucky,”
rejoined Socrates, “that these discourses have been spoken, since they
afford an example, how he who knows the truth may, in mere sport,
mislead his audience by a speech.”

Phædrus now, according to agreement, begins to read the discourse of
Lysias from the commencement. Before he has completed the second
sentence, Socrates stops him, in order to point out already a proof of
want of art.

“Is it not clear that about some things we are all of one mind, about
others we differ?”—“I think I understand you, but nevertheless explain
yourself Edition: current; Page: [83] more clearly.”—“When we use the
words silver, or iron, we all of us mean the same thing by them. But
when we speak of what is just, or of what is good, we all go off in
different directions, and are at variance both with each other and in
ourselves.” Phædrus assented. “In which of these two kinds of things are
we most easily deceived, and in which is the power of oratory the
greatest?”—“In those in which we wander without fixed principles.”—“He,
then, who seeks to acquire an art of oratory, should first be able
properly to distinguish and characterize these two kinds of things,
those in which the multitude must of necessity wander, and those in
which they need not.”—“This would be an admirable discovery.”—“And next,
he must be able to distinguish and clearly perceive, without mistake,
whether that of which he is about to speak, belongs to the one class or
to the other.”—“Granted.”

“Now, should love be considered to be one of these disputable
things?”—“Undoubtedly: how else could you have made, as you did, two
long speeches, one to show that love is injurious both to the lover and
the loved, the other, that it is the greatest of blessings?”—“You say
truth; but now tell me (for I, on account of the state of inspiration in
which I was, do not recollect,) whether I began by defining love?”—“You
did, most accurately.”—“How much more skilled, then, in the oratorical
art, must be the Nymphs and Pan, by whom I was inspired, than your
friend Lysias! for he obliged us to begin by supposing, and not
inquiring, what love is, and then grounded his entire discourse on a
mere supposition.

“Does not, too, the discourse appear to you to be thrown together quite
at random? Can it be said that what is placed second, for example, or in
any other position, is placed there from any peculiar necessity? To me,
who know nothing, he seemed to say, most undauntedly, whatever came into
his head: but can you point out any oratorical necessity which compelled
him to arrange his thoughts into that particular order?”—“You are very
good, to suppose that I am capable of so accurately judging what such a
man as Lysias composes.”—“But this I think you will allow, that a
discourse should be like an organized creature, having a body of its
own, neither headless nor footless, but having a middle, and
extremities, fitted to one another, and to the whole.”—“Without
doubt.”—“But does anything of this kind appear in your friend’s
discourse?—look, and you will find it very like the inscription which
they ascribe to Midas the Phrygian, which might be read either backwards
or forwards without altering the sense.”—“You are now only laughing at
the discourse.”—“Let us then, in order not to offend you, let alone this
oration, although it seems to me to contain a variety of examples, by
the consideration of which one might be improved. Let us pass to the
other discourses: for in them too there were some things worth observing
to those who are considering Discourse. There were two discourses; the
one in disparagement, the other in eulogy of love.”—“There Edition:
current; Page: [84] were.”—“We affirmed that love was a sort of madness;
did we not?”—“We did.”—“And said that there are two sorts of madness;
one coming from human disease, the other from a divine influence. This
last we divided into four kinds: viz., prophetic inspiration” [here, for
the first time, the very word inspiration, or afflatus (ἐπιπνοία) is
used,]—“the origin of which we ascribed to Apollo; mystico-religious,
(τελεστική), to Bacchus; poetic, to the Muses; and finally, that of
which we are speaking, the inspiration or enthusiasm of Love.”—“We
did.”—“Let us now try whether we can catch the manner in which our
discourse changed from blame to praise.”—“What do you mean?”—“To me it
appears, that all the rest of what was said, was in reality no more than
sport; but that if one could obtain by art, the power or capacity of
these two kinds of operations, which in this instance we have performed
by mere chance, it would be not unpleasant.”—“What things?”—“To collect
together a multitude of scattered particulars, and viewing them
collectively, bring them all under one single idea,* and thereby be
enabled to define, and so make it clear what the thing is which is the
subject of our inquiry. As, for instance (in our own case,) what we said
(whether it was well said or ill) with a view of defining love: for this
was what enabled the subsequent discourse to be clear, and consistent
with itself.”—“You have described one of the two operations which you
spoke of; what is the other?”—“To be able again to subdivide this idea
into species, according to nature, and so as not to break any part of it
in the cutting, like a bad cook. Thus, for example, our two discourses
agreed in taking for their subject, insanity of mind: but in the same
manner as the body has two parts, which are called by the same name in
all other respects, but one called the left side and the other the
right, so our two discourses, taking insanity as one single idea†
existing in us, one of them cut down on the left side, and continued
subdividing until it came to something sinister which bore the name of
Love, and inveighed against it very deservedly; the other taking us to
the right side, found another Love, a namesake of the first, but of a
divine origin and nature, which it held forth and praised as the cause
of our greatest blessings.

Edition: current; Page: [85]
“I, then,” continued Socrates, “being a lover of these compositions and
decompositions, in order that I may be able to speak and to think; if I
find any one whom I think capable of apprehending things as one and
many, I run after him and follow his footsteps as I would those of a
god. Those who can do this, whether I call them rightly or not God
knows, but at present I call them dialecticians: but what are we to call
those who learn from you and Lysias? Is this, of which we have been
talking, the same with that Art of Speaking by the aid of which
Thrasymachus and the rest have become wise in speaking, and have made
others so, who pay tribute to them as to kings?”—“They are kingly
people,” said Phædrus, “but they are not acquainted with that of which
you spoke. I think that you are right in calling this method dialectics;
but it does not seem to me that we have yet found out what oratory
is.”—“Indeed!” replied Socrates: “it must be something curious, if,
being different from what we have been speaking of, it is nevertheless
an art. Let us then see what else oratory consists of.”—“Of a great many
things, which we find in the books of rhetoric.”—“I thank you for
putting me in mind. You mean such things as these; that the exordium
should come first, then the narration and the testimony, then the
positive circumstantial proofs, then the probable ones: and next, I
believe the Byzantine Theodorus talks of confirmation and
super-confirmation, refutation and super-refutation, and how all these
things should be managed, both in accusation and in defence. And why
should we leave out that excellent person, Euœnus of Paros, who first
invented ὑποδήλωσις and παρεπαίνοι.” (The first untranslatable, the
second we suppose means incidental praise.) “Some say he also has
παραψόγοι,” (incidental vituperation,) “which he has put into verse for
the aid of memory; for he is a wise man. Can we omit, moreover; Tisias
and Gorgias, who saw that the plausible was to be honoured above the
true, and who, by force of speaking, can make great things appear small,
and small things great, new things old, and old things new, and who have
found out the way to speak either briefly or to an interminable length
on all subjects? Prodicus once, when I related this to him, laughed, and
said he was the first person who had found out how to speak according to
art: for the speech should be neither short nor long, but
moderate.”—“Very wise indeed.”—“Neither must we leave out Hippias of
Elis, who I should think would be of the same opinion: and Polus, too,
who invented διπλασιολογία, and γνωμολογία, and εἰκονολογία, and so
forth.”—“And did not Protagoras do something of the same kind?”—“He was
skilled in ὀρθοέπεια, and many other fine things. He excelled every body
in speeches of the lugubrious kind, about old age and poverty: he was a
terrible man for enraging people, and then cooling them, and the first
of all men in inveighing and in replying to invective. About the
concluding part of a speech they all seem to agree; some of them call it
recapitulation, and others give it Edition: current; Page: [86] some
other name.”—“You mean, summarily reminding the audience of what you
have said.”—“That is what I mean. Have you anything else to relate which
forms part of the art of oratory?”—“There is very little else.”—“Let us
then leave that very little alone, and examine these things a little
more closely, that we may see what power the art has.”—“Very great power
indeed in a popular assembly.”—“Let us see.

“If any one were to come to your friend Eryximachus, or to his father,
Acumenus, and say, I know how to produce any effect I please upon the
body, I can cool it or heat it, give it an emetic or a purge, and I
therefore think myself a physician, and capable of making others so,
what would they say?”—“They would ask him whether he likewise knows upon
whom to produce these different effects, and when, and to what
degree.”—“And what if he were to answer—By no means; I insist that he
who has learned from me what I before mentioned, will have that other
sort of knowledge as a matter of course.”—“They would reply, The man is
mad, and because he has accidentally discovered or read of some drug or
other, fancies himself a physician, knowing nothing at all of the
art.”—“And what if a man should go to Sophocles or Euripides, and say, I
know how to make a long speech on a small matter, and a short one about
a great matter, and I can make a pathetic speech, or a menacing one, or
a fearful one, and being able to teach all this I can enable any man to
write a tragedy?”—“They too would laugh at the absurdity of supposing
that tragedy consists in any thing but the putting together of these
things so as to be suitable to one another and to the whole.”—“And if a
musician met with a man who thought himself a harmonist because he could
draw from the strings the most acute and the gravest sounds possible, he
would not say to him fiercely, You stupid fellow! you are out of your
wits; but, as being a musician, and therefore of a softer and less
inflammable temperament, he would answer, My good friend, it is
necessary for a harmonist to know these things, but a man may know all
that you know and be not the least of a harmonist notwithstanding. You
possess those acquirements which are preliminary to harmony, but not
harmony itself.”—“Very right.”—“Sophocles would say, in like manner, You
know the preliminaries to tragedy, but not tragedy itself: and Acumenus
would say, You know the preliminaries to medicine, but medicine itself
you know not.”—“Most true.”

“What then do you think that the sweet-voiced Adrastus or Pericles would
say, if they heard recited these splendid inventions which we were just
now talking of, βραχυλογίαι and εἰκονολογίαι and the like? Would they,
like us, say something sharp and coarse to those who write and teach
these things under the name of oratory? or would they, as being wiser
than we, reprove us for our violence, and say, O Phædrus and Socrates,
we ought not to be angry, but should excuse, if there be persons who,
being unversed Edition: current; Page: [87] in dialectics, are unable to
define what oratory is, and therefore, being possessed only of those
acquirements which it is necessary should precede the art, fancy that
they have found an art of oratory, and, teaching these things to others,
think that they have taught them oratory itself; but think nothing of
the power of doing each of these things persuasively, and of putting
them together into a whole, and hold it unnecessary for their scholars
to learn this from their tuition.”

“I am afraid,” observed Phædrus, “that this art of oratory, as they call
it, is indeed no better than you represent it. But from whence might one
derive the art of the real orator—the power of persuasion?”

“The power,” replied Socrates, “if possessed to the degree which
constitutes a perfect orator, is probably, or perhaps necessarily,
governed by the same laws as any other power. If you have natural
capabilities you may become an eminent orator, by the aid of knowledge
and study; if you are wanting in any of these respects, you will be so
far imperfect. But so much of it as is Art, appears to me to be acquired
by a method not similar to that which Lysias and Thrasymachus use.”—“How
then?”—“Pericles is perhaps the most complete orator ever known.”—“What
then?”—“All the greater arts require the study of the abstruser parts of
nature: from which alone loftiness and potency of intellect are derived:
the qualities which, together with great natural aptness, Pericles
possessed. He acquired them, as I imagine, by his intercourse with
Anaxagoras, by whom he was introduced into the higher parts of
knowledge, and penetrated to the nature of the thinking and the
unthinking faculties of man, the subject which Anaxagoras chiefly
treated of; and from this Pericles drew, for the art of speaking, as
much as was applicable to it.”—“How so?”—“The art of oratory resembles
that of medicine. In both, it is necessary to distinguish and subdivide
the nature of body on the one hand, of mind on the other; if you intend
to follow art, and not a mere empirical routine, in giving health and
strength to the former by medicine and sustenance, and producing in the
latter, by speech and precept, virtue and any persuasion which you
desire.”—“This seems reasonable.”—“But is it possible to comprehend well
the nature of Mind, except by comprehending the nature of the
universe?”—“If Hippocrates is to be believed, even the body can be
understood only by that method.”—“He speaks well: but besides
Hippocrates, it is proper to interrogate likewise the argument, and
discover whether it also will assent. Let us see then. Is not this the
proper mode of examining into the nature of any thing—first to consider
whether it is simple or manifold: then, if it is simple, to examine into
its powers, that is, what affections it is capable of causing in other
things, and other things in it: if, on the contrary, it consists of a
variety of sorts, to enumerate them, and make the same inquiry with
respect to each of the sorts; viz. in what Edition: current; Page: [88]
manner it acts upon, and is acted upon by, other
things?”—“Undoubtedly.”—“Any other method would be like a blind man’s
walk. But it is clear, that he who would teach another the art of
speaking, must teach him accurately the nature of that which his
speaking is intended to act upon; and this is, the mind.”—“Agreed.”—“It
is obvious, therefore, that Thrasymachus, and any other who seriously
attempts to teach oratory, must first examine and explain very
carefully, whether the mind is one thing, perfectly resembling itself,
or like the body, of many different kinds: since this is what we found
to be the meaning of what we call unfolding its nature. Next, he must
teach in what manner the mind, by its nature, affects, and is affected
by, other things: and, thirdly, classing the different kinds of mind,
the different modes of speaking, and the various properties of both, he
must adapt the one to the other, and show, what sort of mind, is or is
not persuaded, by what sort of speech, and why.”—“Most true; and in no
other way is it possible either to speak or write according to art.”

“Since, in short, the end of speech is to influence the mind, he who
understands oratory as an art, must know what are the different kinds of
mind; what are the different modes of speaking; and, that a mind of such
and such a sort, is likely to be persuaded by such and such a mode of
speaking, but not likely to be persuaded by such and such another mode,
and this for such and such a reason. And when he has mastered all this,
unless he be also a ready observer of what actually goes on in the
world, he will still know nothing but precisely what he has learned. But
if he knows what sort of man is persuaded by what sort of speaking, and
is able besides to distinguish in real life whether the man whom he is
to persuade is that sort of man or not, then he will know what is the
proper time for using your figures of rhetoric, your βραχυλογία and
ἐλεεινολογία, and δείνωσις, and the rest; and then and not till then
will he be a master of the art. Can you think of any other
mode?”—“No.”—“Let us strive all we can to find whether there by any
shorter and smoother road to the oratorical art, that we may not take a
roundabout way when there is a shorter cut. Can you recollect any thing
of that sort which you have heard from Lysias?”—“I do not.”—“Shall I
tell you then what I have sometimes heard people say? for it is said
that even the wolf ought to have a fair hearing?”—“By all means.”

“They say, then, that there is no need to make oratory so various a
matter, or go so far back in order to arrive at it. The orator has
nothing to do with what is just or good, either in things or men: it is
not the true which any one cares for in a court of justice, but the
plausible: and probability is all which he who speaks according to art,
needs attend to. It is not proper even to assert what actually happened,
if the story be not a probable one: and in short the probable, and not
the true, should be our aim in accusation or defence, and the art of
attaining it is the only art of oratory required.”

Edition: current; Page: [89]
“This,” replied Phædrus, “is what those say who profess to understand
the art of speaking.”—“You have read Tisias: does not Tisias understand
by the probable, that which accords with the opinion of the
multitude?”—“He does.”—“This, then, is his wise invention; that if a
feeble but brave man is brought to trial for knocking down and robbing a
robust coward, neither of them should speak the truth, but the coward
should say, that more than one man attacked him; the other denying this
and proving that they were alone, should ask, How could so weak a person
as I, think of attacking so strong a man? whereupon the first should not
plead his own cowardice, but should invent some other falsehood to
confute that of his adversary.”—“A clever and recondite art truly.”—“But
did we not before agree that this Probable, which Tisias aims at, is
probable (that is, is believed by the multitude) only on account of its
similitude to the truth? and that he who knows the truth, is the best
judge of degrees of resemblance to it? We shall therefore continue to
believe, as we before said, that without understanding the nature of the
different sorts of hearers, and being able to distinguish things into
their kinds, and again to aggregate a number of particulars into one
whole, it is impossible to attain the highest excellence which man is
capable of, in the art of speaking. All this, however, cannot be learned
without great study; which study a wise man ought to perform, not for
the mere sake of speaking and transacting among men, but in order to be
able to speak and act agreeably to the gods. Men wiser than we, have
said that we ought not to make it our object to please our
fellow-servants, except as a work of supererogation: but to please good
masters. It is no wonder, therefore, if the course is long and
roundabout: for there is a great purpose to be served by making this
circuit—a far greater purpose than that which Tisias aims at; though
even that is to be attained most effectually by the same means.

“So much then on the subject of the art of speaking. It remains to
consider in what consists propriety or impropriety of writing.

“Do you know what mode of dealing with discourse is most agreeable to a
divinity?”—“No: do you?”—“I can relate what has been heard from the
sages of old. Whether it is true, the gods themselves alone know. But if
we could find this, should we, after that, care for the opinions of
men?”—“It would be ridiculous: but pray tell us what you say you have
heard.”—“I have heard that at Naucratis in Egypt, there resided one of
the ancient gods of that country, named Theuth, who first invented
numbers, and calculation, and geometry, and astronomy, and dice-playing,
and, among other things, writing. Now, Thamos being king in Egypt, who
is likewise a god, and whom the Greeks call Ammon, Theuth went to him
and expounded to him these arts, and spoke of the great advantage of
communicating them to the other Egyptians. The other asked him the use
of each art, and praised or Edition: current; Page: [90] blamed it
according to the answer he received. Now when the art of writing came
under consideration, Theuth said, ‘This art will make the Egyptians
wiser, and will aid their memory: for it is a help to memory and to
wisdom.’ The other answered, ‘Most sage Theuth, it is one thing to be
able to invent an art, and another to judge of its beneficial or hurtful
effects: and now you, who are the inventor of writing, have ascribed to
it, from partiality, an effect the exact opposite of its real one: this
art will produce forgetfulness in those who learn it, by causing them to
trust to written memoranda, and neglect their memory. What you have
discovered, therefore, is an aid not to memory, but to recollection; and
you will give to your scholars the opinion of wisdom, not the reality:
for hearing much from you, without really learning it, they will appear
men of great acquirements, though really for the most part ignorant and
incapable.’ ”

Phædrus here observed, “You very easily invent Egyptian tales, or tales
of any country you please.”—“They say,” replied Socrates, “that the
first prophecies, those at Dodona, were delivered by an oak. The men of
those days, not being so wise as we moderns, were so silly as to be
content to listen to an oak or a stone, provided it did but speak the
truth: but to you perhaps it is of importance who the speaker is, and
from whence he comes: for you do not consider merely whether the fact is
or is not so.”—“Your reproof is just.”—“He then who thinks that he can
leave behind him an art in a book, and he who learns it out of a book,
and thinks he has got something clear and solid, are extremely simple,
and do not know the saying of Ammon, or they would not suppose that a
written book could do any thing more than remind one who knows already.

“Writing is something like painting: the creatures of the latter art
look very like living beings; but, if you ask them a question, they
preserve a solemn silence. Written discourses do the same: you would
fancy, by what they say, that they had some sense in them; but, if you
wish to learn, and therefore interrogate them, they have only their
first answer to return to all questions. And when the discourse is once
written, it passes from hand to hand, among all sorts of persons,—those
who can understand it, and those who cannot. It is not able to tell its
story to those only to whom it is suitable; and when it is unjustly
criticised, it always needs its author to assist it, for it cannot
defend itself.

“There is another sort of discourse, which is far better and more potent
than this.”—“What is it?”—“That which is written scientifically in the
learner’s mind. This is capable of defending itself; and it can speak
itself, or be silent, as it sees fit.”—“You mean the real and living
discourse of the person who understands the subject; of which discourse
the written one may be called the picture?”—“Precisely. Now, think you
that a sensible Edition: current; Page: [91] husbandman would take seed
which he valued, and wished to produce a harvest, and would seriously,
after the summer had begun, scatter it in the gardens of Adonis,* for
the pleasure of seeing it spring up and look green in a week? or, do you
not rather think that he might indeed do this for sport and amusement,
but, when his purpose was serious, would employ the art of agriculture,
and, sowing the seed at the proper time, be content to gather in his
harvest in the eighth month?”—“The last, undoubtedly.”—“And do you think
that he who possesses the knowledge of what is just, and noble, and
good, will deal less prudently with his seeds than the husbandman with
his?”—“Certainly not.”—“He will not, then, seriously set about sowing
them with a pen and a black liquid; or, (to drop the metaphor,)
scattering these truths by means of discourses which cannot defend
themselves against attack, and which are incapable of adequately
expounding the truth. No doubt, he will, for the sake of sport,
occasionally scatter some of the seeds in this manner, and will thus
treasure up memoranda for himself, in case he should fall into the
forgetfulness of old age, and for all others who follow in the same
track; and he will be pleased when he sees the blade growing up green.
When others play and amuse themselves in other ways, soaking themselves
with wine, and so forth, he will choose this as his amusement.”—“And a
far better one than the other.”—“Assuredly; but it is a far better
employment still, when any one, employing the dialectical art, and
finding a mind which affords a suitable soil, sows and plants therein,
with knowledge, discourses which can defend themselves and him who sows
them, and which are not barren, but in their turn bear seed, from whence
other discourses being reared up in other minds, can make their truths
immortal, and can give to those who possess them, as much happiness as
man is capable of.

“We have now, then, found what we were seeking for; viz., to be enabled
to judge whether it is justly a reproach to Lysias to be a writer of
discourses; and what was the difference between discourses according to
art, and those which are without art.

“On the subject of art, we have come to the conclusion, that unless a
man knows the truth on the subject on which he speaks or writes, and can
define the subject itself, and divide it into kinds until he reaches the
indivisible; and, unless he understands the nature of Mind, and having
found out what kind of discourse is suitable to each kind of mind,
adapts his discourse accordingly (giving to minds of complex and
diversified structure, discourses of the same kind, and to simple minds,
simple discourses)—unless he does all this, he does not possess, in the
greatest perfection, the art of Edition: current; Page: [92] discourse,
whether his end in discoursing be to instruct, or only to persuade.

“And we can now answer the other question, whether to be a writer of
discourses is a reproach. If either Lysias, or any other man, composes a
written discourse on political affairs, and fancies that there is much
of clearness and solidity in it, this is a reproach to the writer, no
doubt; for, not to know what is valuable and what is otherwise, in
respect to justice and injustice, good and evil, is a reproach, even
though the crowd should be unanimous in their applause of it. But a
person who thinks that what is said upon any subject in a written
treatise can be no better than sport, and that nothing worthy of very
serious attention was ever written or delivered in a speech, and that
the best of them are nothing more than memoranda to remind those who
already know, and that there is nothing satisfactory or complete, or
worthy to be seriously considered, but in the discourses which are
really taught and learnt and written in the mind; and that such
discourses are the legitimate offspring of ourselves, first the one
which is in our own minds, (if we have found one, and planted it there,)
and next those brothers or children of it, which have sprung up at the
same time in other minds of other persons; this is such a person as you,
Phædrus, and I, should wish to be.” Phædrus assented.

“Do you, then, tell Lysias, that we two came down here, to the fountain
of the nymphs, and that the nymphs bid us tell him and all other speech
writers, Homer and all other poets, Solon and all others who write what
they call laws, that if they composed these writings knowing what the
truth is, and being able to maintain a discussion on the matters of
which they wrote, and to make, by what they speak, what they have
written appear insignificant, they ought not to be named from this
lighter pursuit, but from their more serious occupation.”—“What name
would you give them?”—“Wise appears to me too assuming a name, and fit
only for a God; but Seeker of Wisdom” (ϕιλόσοϕος, whence the modern word
“philosopher”) “would be a more suitable and decorous
appellation.”—“Agreed.”—“He, on the other hand, who has not in himself
anything of a higher and more perfect kind than what he puts down in
writing, he may be justly called a poet, or a speech-writer, or a
law-writer.”—“Allowed.”—“Then tell this to your friend.”

They here end their discourse; but before they quit the spot, Socrates
suggests the propriety of addressing a prayer to the deities of the
place. His prayer is as follows: “O Pan, and whatever other gods preside
over this spot, grant to me to be beautiful inwardly; and let my
outside, whatever it is, be suitable to what I have within. The rich
man, in my estimation, is the man who is wise; but of gold, let me have
so much as can be sufficient to no one save the prudent and temperate.

Edition: current; Page: [93]
“Is there anything else which we are in want of, Phædrus? My wants have
been tolerably well cared for in this prayer.”—“Offer up the same prayer
for me: friends have all their affairs in common.”—“Let us depart.”

It will have been remarked that Socrates himself treats the whole of
this conversation as of no serious moment, (sport, as he terms it,)
except the concluding discussion; the object of which is one that is
incessantly aimed at in the writings of Plato. This is, in the first
place, to enforce the absolute necessity, as the foundation for all safe
practice, of a just and unambiguous definition of the subject-matter;
and, secondly, to show that this definition can only be arrived at by an
operation which we should call a philosophical analysis, and which he
describes as a process of composition and decomposition, or rather
decomposition and recomposition; first distinguishing a whole into its
kinds or parts, and then looking at those kinds or parts attentively, in
such a manner as to extract from them the idea of the whole. This
two-fold process of analysis and synthesis is the grand instrument of
Plato’s method of philosophising. In the comprehension of the general
ideas thus obtained, (or, as he expresses it in this dialogue, the
apprehension of the same thing as One and as Many,) philosophy,
according to him, consisted. And this principle is the corner-stone, not
only of his logic, but of his metaphysics.

All who possess the faculty of recognising identity of thought
notwithstanding diversity of language, (which, with the converse power
of detecting difference of meaning under identity of expression, is the
first characteristic of an intellect fit for philosophy,) will perceive
that this principle of Plato’s is one on which all systems of logic are
substantially in accordance. Bacon, Locke, Condillac, Stewart, and Kant,
(we need not prolong the enumeration,) have concurred, both in using and
in recommending the method of philosophising which Plato inculcates;
though they are distinguished from one another by the different degree
of clearness which the Platonic principle had assumed in their own
minds, and the diversity of the substructure of metaphysical doctrines
(for systems of metaphysics, like some birds’ nests, are built
downwards, not upwards) which they have constructed underneath it.

When, for instance, Bacon, in defining the scope of all inquiries into
the phenomena of nature, directs the inquirer to collect and compare all
the accessible instances in which any phenomenon (say heat or cold,
hardness or softness) manifests itself, and thence to deduce the nature,
or as he calls it, the form, of Heat in general, Cold in general,
Hardness and Softness in general, (forma calidi aut frigidi, &c.)[*]
wherein does this view of Edition: current; Page: [94] philosophic
method differ from Plato’s? Where, again, a disciple of Locke or
Condillac describes philosophy as consisting in abstraction and
generalization, in the distribution of the objects of nature into
convenient classes, and (by comparison of the different objects
composing each class) framing general propositions expressive of the
distinguishing properties of the class; this too is identical with
Plato’s process of arriving at the knowledge of a thing by apprehending
it as Many and as One. To apprehend it as Many, is to survey the various
objects comprised in the class, and note their resemblances and
differences. To apprehend it as One, is to evolve from this comparison a
general definition of the class, omitting none of the properties by
which as a class it is characterized.

When, however, these various philosophers, not content with cultivating
the field of Logic, (or the science of the investigation of truth,) have
dug down into that region of metaphysics which lies under logic, as it
does under all the other sciences, and which must be examined before we
can be sure that any of them are securely placed; the different
explorers have brought up very different reports of what they have found
there. While all agree in representing it as at least one of the
principal aims of philosophy, to determine with precision the ideas as
they are termed by Plato, the essences as others have called them, of
those great genera and species under which we necessarily or habitually
arrange all the objects of our knowledge; philosophers have differed,
even to contrariety, in their notions of the real nature of those genera
and species. Some have ascribed to them an objective reality, as things
existing in themselves; others, more philosophically, have considered
them as merely subjective, the creatures of our own minds. To state the
same thing more clearly—some, including the greater number of the
philosophers of the last two centuries, consider classification to be
conventional, subject to no laws but those which convenience prescribes;
while others, including most of the ancients, and the prevailing sect
among the Aristotelian schoolmen of the middle ages, thought that genera
and species exist by nature; that every individual thing naturally
belongs to a certain species, and cannot be subjected to any other
classification; and that as there are individual substances, so there
are also universal substances, corresponding to our general or class
names, and with which the individual substances which we rank under
those classes are in a sort of mysterious communion. Thus, there are not
only individual men, and individual stars, but there is also Man in
general, and Star in general; which do not consist of individual men or
stars considered in the aggregate, but are entities existing per se.
John, Peter, or Paul are only constituted men by participating, in some
strange way, in this universal essence of humanity.

Edition: current; Page: [95]
We have stated this doctrine in its most systematic form and in its
extreme extent, as it was conceived by that portion of the schoolmen
called the Realists, who, however, had little warrant for it from the
oracle in which they implicitly confided, their master Aristotle. To the
same school, though in a somewhat qualified sense, the speculations of
Plato decidedly assimilate him. His tendencies (for opinions, let us
once more repeat, are not on such subjects to be ascribed to him) led
him to attribute self-existence to genera and species. In the present
dialogue he adverts only to those genera which form the basis of our
great moral and emotional (or as the Germans say, æsthetic)
classifications. The Just, the Brave, the Holy, the Beautiful (in
English we more readily personify these abstractions by the words
Justice, Courage, Holiness, Beauty) existed according to him as essences
or Ideas, of which all sublunary things which we decorate by these names
were but resemblances or copies: a doctrine shadowed forth in the mythos
which occupies so conspicuous a place in the present dialogue. But the
Ideas or essences of all other things had equally, in his view, an
independent existence; and to these pre-existent ideas as his types or
exemplars, the Creator fashioned all that he called into existence by
his will. This is the doctrine more or less vaguely alluded to by those
who speak of the Platonic or as it is sometimes called the Divine Idea.

Views not indeed the same but analogous to these, are professed at this
day by most German philosophers, and by their followers in France and
England. It is natural that persons holding such opinions, should deem
these Ideas (for they have endeavoured to bring back the Platonic word
to its Platonic sense) to be the objects of the highest knowledge; the
knowledge to which the term Philosophy ought to be confined; and that to
apprehend an idea “as One and as Many,” to detect and distinguish it
when “immersed in matter” and clothed in innumerable circumstances,
should be in their estimation, the triumph and the test of philosophic
inquiry.

The more rational metaphysics which prevail among most English and
French philosophers, lead to logical results not so different from these
as the difference of the premises might lead one to suppose. Though
classification be conventional, all science consists in generalization,
and our attainments in science may be measured by the number of general
truths which we are acquainted with, that is, by the amount of what we
are able to predicate of classes. And, as we are at liberty to take any
of the properties of an object for principles of classification, we can
only know the essences of all possible classes by knowing all that is to
be known concerning objects. In this sense, all science may be said,
even by a follower of Locke or Condillac, to consist in knowing the
essences of classes.

To apprehend with accuracy and distinctness all that is included in the
Edition: current; Page: [96] conception of the classes which we have
formed for ourselves, or which have been formed for us by our
predecessors, does not according to this theory as according to Plato’s,
constitute philosophy; but whoever takes this as his object, will
scarcely fail of attaining all the other results which philosophy
proposes to itself; at least in the field of morals and psychology;
where the desideratum is not so much new facts, as a more comprehensive
survey of known facts in their various bearings, all which are sure to
be successively forced upon the attention by a well-conducted and
unbiassed inquiry into the meaning of established terms, or, what is the
same thing, into the essences of established classes. And this is the
substance of Plato’s analytic method.

Edition: current; Page: [97]


The Gorgias

[Monthly Repository, VIII (Oct., Nov., and Dec., 1834), 691-710, 802-15,
and 829-42. Not republished; signed “A.” Identified in JSM’s
bibliography (after the general heading cited on 38 above) as “No III.
The Gorgias: part 1 in the M.R. for Octob. 1834 / part 2 in the M.R. for
Nov. 1834 / part 3 in the M.R. for Decemb. 1834” (MacMinn, 37). In the
Somerville College copy, inked corrections at 108n.1 change Καλὸνν to
Καλὸν and Αἰσχρὸ to Αἰσχρὸν.

For comment on this and the other translations, see the Introduction and
the Textual Introduction, xvii-xxviii and lxxx-lxxxiii above.]

the dialogue on which we are now about to enter is among the most
celebrated of Plato’s works, and deserves peculiar attention, as one of
those on which his fame as an ethical writer is principally founded. The
perusal of it is well fitted to suggest many reflections on the nature
of ethical writing in general, and on the principles by which our
estimation of a moralist ought to be guided; for some of which
reflections we may, perhaps, find room at the conclusion of this notice.
We shall now, without further delay, introduce the reader to Plato
himself; merely premising as to the tendencies of the dialogue, that its
whole drift and scope is to discredit mere worldly-minded men, and the
teachers of those arts, or rather pursuits, (for our author uniformly
refuses to them the name of arts,) which conduce only to worldly
success; and to enforce, by all manner of considerations, the superior
dignity and eligibility of a virtuous life, compared with the most
successful achievements of a life of mere ambition, in which no moral
obligations are recognized, or in which, if recognized, they are not
regarded.

As this dialogue is one of the finest specimens both of Plato’s
dialectical powers, and of his extraordinary dramatic talent, our
abstract of it shall be fuller than usual.

Gorgias, of Leontium, the celebrated rhetorician, and a younger teacher
of the same art, named Polus, are sojourning at Athens, in the house of
Callicles, a man not otherwise known to us, but who seems to have been
what is called a politician, (πολιτικός), a frequenter of, and speaker
at, the public assemblies, the great object of whose life was the
attainment of Edition: current; Page: [98] influence in public affairs.
To this house Socrates, with his friend Chærephon, pays a visit, and
finds that Gorgias has just terminated a long exposition, or lecture.
Socrates, however, expressed a hope that Gorgias would still consent to
expound to him; as he was desirous to hear from himself, what was the
power of his art, and what it was he professed to teach: the remainder
of his exposition might be postponed to another time. Callicles replied,
that there was nothing like asking the man himself; and that he had, in
fact, undertaken to answer whatever questions any one thought fit to
ask. Socrates therefore requested Chærephon, who was previously
acquainted with Gorgias, to ask. “Ask what?” said Chærephon.—“Ask him
what he is.”—“How?”—“So that, if he made shoes, he would answer that he
is a shoemaker: do you understand me?”—“Yes,” answered Chærephon, and
addressed Gorgias thus: “Is it true, O Gorgias, as Callicles tells me,
that you offer to answer any sort of questions?”—“It is. I said so just
now; and no one, for many years past, has asked me any question which
was new to me.”—“Then you must be very ready at answering.”—“You have it
in your power to try me.”—“Yes,” (said Polus, interposing in the
conversation,) “and me likewise, if you like: for Gorgias seems to me to
be tired, having just now spoken at great length.”—“Do you think,” said
Chærephon, “that you can answer better than Gorgias?”—“Of what
consequence is that, if I can answer well enough for you?”—“Answer then.
If Gorgias were skilled in the same art as his brother Herodicus, what
ought we to call him?”—“What his brother is; a physician: is it not
so?”—“Certainly.”—“If he were acquainted with the same art as
Aristophon, what ought we to call him?”—“A painter.”—“But now, since he
is skilled in some art, what is the name that we ought to give him?”—“O
Chærephon,” answered Polus, “there are among men many arts, skilfully
derived from skill. Skill makes our lives pass according to art; want of
skill according to chance. Some partake of some of these arts, others of
others: the best persons partake of the best arts; of whom Gorgias is
one, and partakes of the noblest of arts.”

Socrates now interposes, and addressing Gorgias, observes, that Polus
seems to be well provided with words, but that he has not performed what
he promised to Chærephon. “What is that?” answered Gorgias.—“He does not
answer the question which was put to him.”—“Suppose that you were to
question him yourself.”—“If you will permit me, I would much rather
question you: for it is clear to me, from what Polus said, that he has
bestowed more attention upon what is called rhetoric, than upon the art
of discussion,” (or dialectics).—“How so?” asked Polus.—“Because, when
Chærephon asked you what was the art which Gorgias taught, you
panegyrized the art, as if somebody had censured it, but what it was you
did not tell.”—“Did I not say that it was the noblest of arts?”—“Very
true: but Edition: current; Page: [99] nobody asked you what was the
quality of Gorgias’s art, but what was the nature of it, and what
Gorgias ought to be called. As then Chærephon put his first questions
well, and you answered well and briefly, so now answer me what is the
art of Gorgias, and what he is to be called: or rather, Gorgias, do you
yourself tell us what art it is which you practise.”—“Rhetoric,”
answered Gorgias.—“You are, then, a rhetorician?”—“A good one, if, as
Homer says, you call me that which I boast of being.”[*]—“and you are
capable of making others so?”—“I profess to be capable.”

Soc. “Should you, Gorgias, be willing to continue questioning and
answering as we have now begun, and to let alone, until another
occasion, that length of discourse which Polus began with? If, however,
you promise, do not fail to perform, but answer with brevity what is
asked.” Gor. “Some answers it is impossible to give, except at
considerable length: but I will attempt to do it as briefly as possible:
for this, too, is one of the things which I profess; that no one can say
the same thing in fewer words than myself.” S. “This is what there is
now occasion for: be pleased, therefore, to exemplify your brevity now,
and your power of enlarging another time.

“Since rhetoric is the thing you are skilled in, what is the
subject-matter which rhetoric relates to? Weaving relates to the making
of clothing; does it not?” G. “Yes.” S. “And music is about the making
of songs?” G. “Yes.” S. “What, then, is rhetoric about?” G. “About
discourse.”

S. “What sort of discourse? that which teaches the sick by what regimen
they may get well?” G. “No.” S. “Rhetoric, then, does not relate to all
sorts of discourse.” G. “It does not.” S. “But it makes men able to
speak.” G. “It does.” S. “And on the matters on which it makes them able
to speak, it makes them able likewise to think.” G. “Certainly.” S.
“Now, does not the art of medicine enable people to speak and think
concerning the sick?” G. “Undoubtedly.” S. “Then medicine likewise
relates to discourse; viz., discourse on the subject of diseases.” G.
“It does.” S. “And gymnastics* relate to discourse; viz., discourse on
the subject of good and bad habits of body.” G. “Without doubt.” S. “And
the same thing may be said of all other arts: each of them relates to
discourse; viz., discourse respecting the subject with which that
particular art is conversant.” G. “It appears so.” S. “Why, then, do you
not call the other arts rhetoric, being on the subject of discourse, if
you call that which is on the subject of discourse by the name of
rhetoric?” G. “Because the other arts Edition: current; Page: [100]
relate, in a manner, entirely to manual operations, and such like
things: but rhetoric has nothing to do with manual operations; it whole
agency and force are by means of discourse.”

S. “Now I partly understand what you mean; but I hope to understand it
still better. Are there not two kinds of arts? In the one kind, the
greater part of the art lies in action, and these arts have occasion for
but little discourse; some of them require none at all, and might be
performed in silence, such as painting, sculpture, and so forth. This is
the class to which you say that rhetoric does not belong: do you not?”
G. “You understand me rightly.” S. “But there is another kind, which
perform all by discourse, and require no action, or very little, such as
arithmetic and geometry, and many others, some of which have about an
equal share of action and of discourse, but the greater part have
scarcely anything except discourse, and effect all their purposes by
means of it: and I understand you to say that rhetoric is one of these.”
G. “True.” S. “But you do not call any of the arts which I have
mentioned, rhetoric? although in words you said as much, saying that
rhetoric is the art of which the whole power consists in discourse; and
if any one wished to cavil, he might ask, Do you, then, call arithmetic
rhetoric? But I do not believe that you call either arithmetic or
geometry by that name.” G. “You think rightly.” S. “Then finish the
answer to my question. Since rhetoric is one of the arts which chiefly
employ discourse, and since there are others which do the same, explain
to me on what subject it is that rhetoric employs discourse. Thus, if
any one asked me, What is arithmetic? I might answer as you did, It is
one of the arts whose force consists in discourse. And if he should
further inquire, On what subject? I should reply, On the subject of
numbers. Since, then, rhetoric is one of the arts which effect their end
wholly by means of discourse, what is the subject of the discourse which
rhetoric employs?” G. “The greatest and best of the concerns of man.”

“But this answer,” observed Socrates, “is disputable and ambiguous. I
suppose you have heard at entertainments the old song, Health is the
best of all things, beauty the second best, and the third is to be rich
without guilt.” G. “I have: but to what purpose is this?” S. “Because
the providers of the three things which are praised in the old song,
viz. the physician, the teacher of gymnastics, and the man of business,
might start up, and, first, the physician might say, Gorgias deceives
you, Socrates: it is not his art, but mine, which relates to the
greatest and best concerns of man. And if I asked, Who are you who speak
in this manner, he would answer, A physician. And if I rejoined, How do
you prove the object of your art to be the greatest good? How can it be
otherwise? he would reply: What greater good is there to man than
health? In like manner the gymnast, and the man of business, would each
set up the claim of his art to be the art which is Edition: current;
Page: [101] conversant with the greatest good. I should answer, But
Gorgias contends that his art produces a greater good to man than yours.
They would then reply, And what is this good? Let Gorgias answer.
Consider yourself, then, to be interrogated both by them and by me, and
answer, what is this which you consider the greatest good to man, and of
which you profess to be the artist?”

“It is,” replied Gorgias, “that which is really the greatest good, and
which both enables men to be themselves free, and enables each, in his
own state, to govern the rest.” S. “And what is this?” G. “The ability
to persuade, by discourse, either judges in a tribunal, or senators in a
council-house, or voters in a meeting of the people, and in every other
political assembly. If you have this power, you will have the physician
for your slave, the gymnast for your slave, and the man of business will
transact business for the profit, not of himself, but of you who are
able to speak and persuade the multitude.”

“Now,” replied Socrates, “you appear to me to come near to an
explanation what art you consider rhetoric to be. If I understand you,
rhetoric is that which works persuasion; and its whole agency is summed
up and terminates in that. Or can you point out anything which rhetoric
can do, more than to produce persuasion in the minds of the hearers?” G.
“No: you seem to me to define it adequately.”

“Hear me, then,” said Socrates. “I persuade myself, that if there is any
person who converses with another wishing to arrive at a real knowledge
of the thing which the discussion relates to, I am such a person: and I
wish you to be so.” G. “What then?” S. “I will tell you. What, and on
what topics this persuasion is, which you say results from rhetoric, I
do not clearly know; and though I certainly suspect, I will nevertheless
ask you. Now, why do I, suspecting it myself, question you, and not
myself declare it? Not on your account, but for the sake of the
discussion, that it may proceed in such a manner as to make that about
which we are talking clearest to us. Consider then whether I interrogate
you fairly. If I were to ask you, what painter is Zeuxis? and you were
to answer, The man who paints animals; might I not fairly ask you, What
animals, on what material?” G. “Certainly.” S. “Because there are other
painters who paint other animals.” G. “Yes.” S. “But if nobody had ever
painted animals except Zeuxis, your answer would have been right.” G.
“Certainly.” S. “Now then, on the subject of rhetoric, tell me, whether
rhetoric is the only art which produces persuasion? What I mean is this:
when a man teaches any thing, does he persuade people of that which he
teaches, or not?” G. “He persuades more than any body.” S. “To return to
our former examples—does not arithmetic, and does not the arithmetician,
teach us the properties of numbers?” G. “Yes.” S. “Then they persuade
us.” G. “Yes.” S. “Then Edition: current; Page: [102] arithmetic also
works persuasion.” G. “So it seems.” S. “Then if we are asked, What
persuasion, and respecting what; we should answer, The persuasion, which
instructs us respecting the properties of numbers. And in like manner we
can show what persuasion, and on what matter, is wrought by each of the
other arts which we mentioned.” G. “Yes.” S. “Then rhetoric is not the
only worker of persuasion?” G. “True.” S. “Then we may ask you, what
persuasion, and on what matter, is wrought by rhetoric.” G. “The
persuasion of courts of justice and other assemblies, and on the subject
of the just and the unjust.”

S. “I suspected that you meant this kind of persuasion, and on this
subject. But that you may not be surprised if I should hereafter ask you
something which, like this, appears obvious, I do so in order that the
argument may be carried straight through: not on your account, but that
we may not accustom ourselves to anticipate each other’s meaning by
guess; and that you may complete your exposition in your own manner.” G.
“You do very right.” S. “Let us then consider this. There is such a
thing as to learn?” G. “Yes.” S. “And such a thing as to believe?” G.
“Yes.” S. “To believe and to learn, are these the same thing, or
different things?” G. “Different things, I conceive.” S. “You conceive
rightly, as may be known from this: If you were asked whether there are
true belief and false belief, you would say, Yes.” G. “I should.” S.
“But are there true knowledge and false knowledge?” G. “No.” S. “Then
they are not the same thing?” G. “They are not.” S. “But they who have
learnt, and they who only believe, are both of them persuaded?” G. “They
are.” S. “Shall we say, then, that there are two kinds of persuasion,
the one affording belief without knowledge, the other affording
knowledge?” G. “Yes.” S. “Which sort of persuasion does rhetoric produce
in courts of justice and other assemblies, respecting the just and the
unjust? The sort which produces belief without knowledge, or that which
produces knowledge?” G. “Evidently that which produces belief.” S.
“Rhetoric, then, works the persuasion of belief, not the persuasion of
knowledge, respecting the just and the unjust?” G. “Yes.” S. “The orator
then does not instruct courts of justice and other assemblies respecting
the just and the unjust, but only persuades them: for he could not, in a
short time, instruct a large assembly in such great matters?” G.
“Certainly not.” S. “Let us see then what we are to think of rhetoric;
for I do not know what to say about it. When an assembly is called
together for the choice of physicians, or of ship builders, or any other
sort of artists, will the rhetorician then not offer his opinion? for it
is clear that in every election, whoever is the greatest master of the
art ought to be chosen. If the question relate to the building of walls,
or the construction of ports or docks, will the advisers be not the
rhetoricians, but the engineers? If it relate to the choice of generals,
or the operations of warfare, will the men versed in military Edition:
current; Page: [103] affairs advise, and the rhetoricians not? or how is
it? for since you say that you are a rhetorician, and can make others
so, it is right to ask of you what belongs to your art. Consider me to
be advancing your own interests also: for there are perhaps some persons
here who wish to become your disciples. Imagine that you are asked by
them, What shall we get by your instructions? on what subject shall we
be able to advise the State? on the just and the unjust only, or on the
other matters also, which Socrates just now mentioned?”

“I will endeavour,” answered Gorgias, “to unfold to you clearly the
whole power of rhetoric; for you have well led the way. You know that
the walls, and docks, and harbours of Athens were constructed by the
advice of Themistocles and of Pericles, not by that of the workmen.” S.
“They say so of Themistocles; and Pericles I have myself heard.” G. “And
when there is a choice to be made on these matters, you see that the
orators are those who prevail, and carry the people along with them.” S.
“It is the wonder which this excites in me, that makes me so anxious to
find out what is the power of rhetoric; for, when considered in this
light, it appears a thing of astonishing greatness.” G. “If you knew
all, you would see that it comprises and holds subject to itself almost
all other powers. I will give you a remarkable proof:—Often have I gone,
with my brother and other physicians, to visit a sick man who would not
take medicine or undergo an operation; and when the physician could not
persuade him, I persuaded him, by no other art than rhetoric. I affirm,
that, in any city you please, if a rhetorician and a physician were to
contend, by discourse, in an assembly or meeting, as competitors for
appointment to any office, the physician would be thought nothing of;
the able speaker would be chosen, if he wished it: and if he became the
rival of any other artist whatever, he would persuade them to choose him
in preference to the other; for there is no subject on which a
rhetorician would not speak more persuasively than any other person, to
a multitude. Such and so great is the power of the art. It should,
however, be used like any other power of subversion and overthrow. Such
power ought not, because we possess it, to be therefore used against all
persons indiscriminately. It does not follow, because a man has learnt
to box, or to wrestle, or to fence, so as to be more than a match for
friend or foe, that he should beat, and wound, and slay his friends:
neither, if when, by gymnastic exercises, a man has acquired strength
and skill, he beats his father, or his mother, or any of his relations
or friends, ought we therefore to abhor and expel from the state the
teachers of gymnastics and the fencing masters. They communicated the
art, that it might be used justly, against the enemy and against
wrongdoers, defensively, not for purposes of aggression; but their
pupils pervert the faculty, and turn their strength and their art to an
improper use. We are not, however, to impute Edition: current; Page:
[104] this, and the criminality of it, to the art or to the teachers of
the art, but to those who employ it ill. The like is true with rhetoric.
An orator is able to speak to all men and on any subject, so as to
persuade the multitude; but he ought not to employ this faculty in
depriving physicians or artificers of their reputation, merely because
he has the power to do so: he should use rhetoric, like any other power,
with justice: and if, having become a rhetorician, he employs his power
and his art to do wrong, we should not abhor and banish the teacher, who
gave the art for a good purpose, but him who employs it for a bad one.”

Socrates thus replied: “I think, Gorgias, that you have had experience
of many discussions, and must have perceived this, that men seldom know
how jointly to examine and mark out the things about which they attempt
to discuss; and having learnt and instructed themselves, so to break off
the conversation. But if they dispute on any matter, and one of them
charges the other with not speaking rightly, or not clearly, they are
angry, and think that it is said in envy, and not in the pursuit of the
proposed object of discourse; and they sometimes end by shamefully
reproaching one another, and bandying such words as make the bystanders
ashamed of themselves for having desired to listen to such men. Why do I
say this? Because, what you now say, appears to me not very consistent
with what you previously said concerning rhetoric. Now, I am afraid to
confute you, lest you should suppose that I do it not from zeal to find
the thing which we are in quest of, but in the spirit of contention
against you. Now, if you are such a person as I am, I should like to go
on interrogating you; if not, I will let it alone. And what sort of a
man am I? One, who would gladly be refuted, if I affirm what is not
true; and who would gladly refute, when another person does so; but who
would just as gladly be refuted as refute; for I think it a greater
good, by so much as it is a greater thing, to be ourselves relieved from
the greatest of evils, than to relieve another person; and I conceive
that there is no human evil so great as false opinion on the subject of
which our present discourse treats. If, then, you are a person of the
same sort, let us continue; but if you think we had better leave off, we
will.”

“I,” said Gorgias, “profess to be such a person as you describe; but
perhaps we should consider the wish of those who are present.” They,
however, unanimously begged that the argument might proceed; and Gorgias
said it would be disgraceful for him, especially after he had undertaken
to answer all questions, not to be willing to continue.

“Hear, then,” resumed Socrates, “something in your discourse which
surprises me. You say that you can make any person, who receives your
instructions, an orator, capable of persuading a multitude; not
producing knowledge in their minds, but belief. You said that, on the
subject of the healthful or unhealthful, an orator would be more capable
of persuading Edition: current; Page: [105] than a physician.” G.
“Certainly; in a multitude.” S. “In a multitude, is as much as to say,
among those who do not know; for those who do know, will not be
persuaded by him better than by a physician.” G. “Certainly.” S. “Then,
if he is more persuasive than a physician, he is more persuasive than
one who knows?” G. “Undoubtedly.” S. “Not being himself a physician?” G.
“No.” S. “And, therefore, being ignorant of those things which the
physician knows?” G. “Yes.” S. “When, then, the orator is more
persuasive than the physician, one who does not know is more persuasive
among those who do not know, than one who does know?” G. “This certainly
follows.” S. “So it is, then, in all other arts. The orator and his art
need not know how things really are; but they have invented a
contrivance of persuasion, by which, among those who do not know, they
appear to know more than those who do know.” G. “Is it not, then, a
great privilege, not learning any other art, but only this one, to be
nowise inferior to the artists themselves?”

“Whether,” replied Socrates, “the orator is inferior or not inferior to
other people, we shall examine by-and-bye. At present let me inquire
this:—Is the rhetorician situated in the same manner with respect to the
just and unjust, the noble and disgraceful, the good and evil, as he is
with respect to health, and the other subjects of the different arts;
viz., himself, not knowing what is good or evil, just or unjust, but
having a contrivance of persuasion, so as to appear, among those who do
not know, to be more knowing than those who do? Or is it necessary that
he should really know these things, and should have learnt them before
he comes to learn rhetoric from you? And pray, will you, the teacher of
rhetoric, if you find him ignorant of these things, not teach him them,
but only enable him, not knowing them, to seem to the vulgar to know
them, and appear a good man without being so? Or, are you not able to
teach him rhetoric at all, unless he knows the real nature of these
things beforehand? Or how is it? And pray unfold to me, as you just now
said, the whole power of the art.” G. “I conceive, that if he happened
not to know these things, he would learn these likewise from me.” S.
“If, then, you are to make any person a rhetorician, it is necessary
that he should know the just and the unjust, either beforehand, or by
your instructions?” G. “Yes.”

S. “Now, is not he who has learnt architecture, an architect?” G. “Yes.”
S. “He who has learnt music, a musician?” G. “Yes.” S. “He who has
learnt medicine, a physician; and, to speak generally, he who has learnt
anything, is that which the science he has learnt causes men to be.” G.
“Certainly.” S. “Then, by this reasoning, he who has learnt justice is
just.” G. “Certainly.” S. “Then a rhetorician must be just.” G. “Yes.”
S. “But a just man acts justly.” G. “Yes.” S. “And a just man must
necessarily wish to act justly?” G. “So it seems.” S. “Then a just man
will never wish Edition: current; Page: [106] to do injustice.” G. “No.”
S. “But we said that a rhetorician must be just.” G. “Yes.” S. “Then a
rhetorician will never wish to do injustice.” G. “It appears not.”* S.
“Do you remember now, that you said a short time ago, that as a gymnast
ought not to be blamed nor expelled from the State if a boxer or
wrestler makes an ill use of his art, so if an orator uses rhetoric for
a bad purpose, we ought not to reproach or banish the teacher of
rhetoric, but the person who perverts it to unjust purposes.” G. “I
did.” S. “But now it seems that a rhetorician cannot be unjust.” G. “It
seems so.” S. “And it was observed before, that the subject of rhetoric
is discourse; not discourse on numbers, but discourse on the just and
the unjust.” G. “Yes.” S. “When you said this, I imagined that rhetoric
could not be an unjust thing, since all its discourse is of justice; but
when you afterwards said that an orator might employ rhetoric unjustly,
I wondered, and thinking the two assertions inconsistent, I said, that
if you, like myself, thought it a benefit to be refuted, it was worth
while to continue the argument, but if not, it was better to leave it
alone. And now, on further inquiry, we have admitted that a rhetorician
cannot possibly use rhetoric unjustly, or wish to do injustice. To
discover how this is, would require not a little conversation and
discussion.”

Here Polus breaks in; and, as we have seen in the preceding part of the
dialogue how Socrates could conduct a respectful and well-bred
disputation, we shall now see in what manner he could beat back an
overweening and petulant assailant.

“What!” said Polus: “do you really think, on the subject of rhetoric,
what you say? Do you not perceive that the advantage you have assumed
over Gorgias is only owing to his shamefacedness, because he did not
like to confess the truth? He was ashamed not to profess that a
rhetorician knows what is really just, and good, and noble, and that he,
Gorgias, if any one comes to him ignorant of these things, can teach
them. In consequence of this admission, something like a contradiction,
perhaps, arose in his discourse; the thing which always delights you.
Who do you suppose would Edition: current; Page: [107] not, if asked,
affirm that he knows what is just, and can teach it? But it is extremely
unfair and ill-bred to drive any one into such a dilemma.”

“Most excellent Polus,” replied Socrates, “the great use of having
friends or sons is, that when we grow old and fall into error, you
younger men may set us right. If, therefore, Gorgias and I have made any
mistake, do you correct it: and if any of our admissions appear to you
improper, we will retract it, if you will only guard against one thing.”
P. “What thing?” S. “That lengthiness of discourse which you began
with.” P. “What! Shall I not be allowed to say as much as I please?” S.
“You would be extremely ill used, my good friend, if coming to Athens,
where there is greater freedom of speech than in any other city in
Greece, you alone should not be suffered to participate in it. But
consider this on the other hand: If you make long speeches, and do not
choose to answer the question that is put to you, should not I also be
very ill used if I were not allowed to go away and not listen to you? If
you have a real regard for the discussion which has been commenced, and
wish to rectify what was wrong in it, take back any of the concessions
that have been made, and by questioning and answering, refute and be
refuted; for you profess to know what Gorgias knows, do you not?” P. “I
do.” S. “Then you also invite persons to put questions to you, and
undertake to answer them?” P. “Certainly.” S. “Then do which you please;
interrogate, or answer.”

P. “So I will. Tell me, Socrates, since you think that Gorgias cannot
tell what rhetoric is, pray what do you consider it to be?” S. “Do you
ask me what art I consider it to be?” P. “I do.” S. “No art at all, to
tell you the truth.” P. “What thing, then, do you call it?” S. “A thing
which you, in a book which I lately read, profess to erect into an art.”
P. “And what is it?” S. “A kind of skill.” P. “Rhetoric, then, according
to you, is a kind of skill?” S. “Yes, if you have no objection.” P.
“Skill in what?” S. “In gratification, and the production of pleasure.”
P. “Is not rhetoric, then, a fine thing, since it is capable of causing
gratification?” S. “What, Polus! have I yet told you what I say it is,
so that you should already ask me whether I do not think it a fine
thing?” P. “Did you not tell me that it was a kind of skill?” S. “Since
you set such a value on gratification, will you gratify me a little?” P.
“I will.” S. “Ask me, then, what art I consider cookery to be.” P. “I
ask you, what art is cookery?” S. “None at all.” P. “What is it then?”
S. “A kind of skill.” P. “Skill in what?” S. “In gratification, and the
production of pleasure.” P. “Are cookery and rhetoric, then, the same
thing?” S. “No; but they are branches of the same pursuit.” P. “What
pursuit is that?” S. “I am afraid it would be ill bred to say the truth:
I do not like to say it, on Gorgias’s account, lest he should think that
I am satirizing his profession. I do not know whether this is the
rhetoric which Gorgias professes: for we could not make out clearly in
the former discussion what he understands by it: but Edition: current;
Page: [108] what I call rhetoric, is a branch of a thing which is not
very admirable.” “What thing?” asked Gorgias. “Speak; and do not have
any reluctance on my account.”

S. “I think, Gorgias, that it is a pursuit, not governed by art, but
belonging to a mind of great tact and boldness, and greatly fitted by
nature for intercourse with men: and I call it, in one word, Adulation.
Of this pursuit there are many other branches, and cookery is one, which
is thought to be an art, but, in my opinion, is no art, but a skill, and
a routine. I call rhetoric, and cosmetics, (the toilet,) and the pursuit
of the sophist, other species of the same pursuit. There are thus four
branches of it, conversant with four different things. If Polus wishes
to question me further, let him do so; for I have told him that I
consider rhetoric to be a branch of adulation, but not what branch; and
he has overlooked that I have not yet answered his first question,
though he goes on pressing me with a second, and asks me whether I think
rhetoric a fine thing, before I have answered what it is. This is not
fair, Polus; if you wish to know, ask me what branch of adulation I
affirm rhetoric to be.” P. “I do ask; answer what branch it is?” S. “Do
you think you shall understand my answer? Rhetoric, in my view of the
matter, is the counterfeit of a branch of politics.” P. “Well then, do
you call it a noble or an ignoble thing?”* S. “An ignoble thing; for all
bad things I call ignoble: since I must answer you as if you already
understood what I have been saying.” “By Jupiter!” said Gorgias,
“neither do I myself understand what you mean.” S. “And no wonder, for I
have not yet explained myself at all clearly; but Polus is young and
sharp.” “Leave him alone,” resumed Gorgias, “and tell me how you
consider rhetoric to be the counterfeit of a branch of politics.”

“I will try,” said Socrates, “to explain what rhetoric seems to me to
be: and, if it be not so, Polus will refute me. There are such things as
body and mind?” Gorgias answered, “There are.” S. “There is such a thing
as a good habit of body, or of mind?” G. “There is.” S. “And there is
such a thing as an apparently good habit, which is not really so. Many
persons seem to be in a good state of body, and no one but a physician
or a gymnast could readily perceive that they are not so.” G. “True.” S.
“There are things, moreover, which cause the body and the mind to be
apparently in a good state, without really improving their condition at
all.” G. “There are so.”

S. “Now, then, I can more clearly explain my meaning. These two Edition:
current; Page: [109] things, body and mind, form the subjects of two
arts. The art which relates to the mind, I call Politics, or the Social
Art. The art which relates to the body, I cannot call by any single
name; but the culture of the body, being itself one, has two branches,
which are, gymnastics and medicine. Politics consists of the art of
legislation, which corresponds to gymnastics, and the art of judicature,
which corresponds to medicine. Gymnastics and Medicine, as they relate
to the same subject, have some things in common with each other, as have
likewise Judicature and Legislation; but they nevertheless have some
differences. These, then, are four arts, which serve the body and the
mind, always having in view their greatest good. Adulation, perceiving
this, I do not say knowing, but divining it, separates itself into four
branches, and, decking itself in the garb of these four arts, pretends
to be that which it counterfeits; not paying any regard to the greatest
good, but baiting its hook with the greatest pleasure, so as to deceive
the unreflecting, and appear the most valuable of all things. Cookery
puts on the semblance of medicine, and pretends to know what kinds of
food are best for the body; and if a physician and a cook had to appear
before children, or before men who are as unthinking as children, that
it might be decided which of them best understood good and bad diet, the
physician would starve for want of employment. This I call adulation,
and I hold it to be a disgraceful thing, Polus, because it aims at the
pleasant only, without regarding the greatest good; and I affirm that it
is not an art, but a mere skill, because it cannot give any account of
the real nature of the things which it employs, nor, consequently, can
it explain the cause of the effects which it produces. I do not give the
name of art to that which cannot render a reason for what it enjoins. If
you doubt this, I am willing to contest it with you. Cookery, then,
counterfeits medicine. In like manner, Cosmetics counterfeits
Gymnastics, being a tricky, ignoble, and illiberal practice, which
deceives by artificial colour and smoothness and figure and dress; and,
by giving factitious beauty, produces neglect of our own natural beauty,
which is the result of gymnastics. Not to be lengthy, I will say to you
in geometrical language, that, as Cookery is to Medicine, so is
Cosmetics to Gymnastics; or, rather, as Cosmetics to Gymnastics, so is
the pursuit of the sophist to the art of Legislation; and, as Cookery to
Medicine, so is Rhetoric to the art of Judicature. These distinctions,
at any rate, are real; although their pursuits, being nearly allied, are
not unfrequently blended together, and it is not possible always to
distinguish accurately which of them is practised by any particular
individual.

“Now, if the body were not governed by the mind, but governed itself; if
Cookery and Medicine were not surveyed and discriminated by the mind,
but were to be judged by the body, taking its own gratification for the
standard; no doubt the things which conduce to health, and those which
Edition: current; Page: [110] conduce to the palate, the things which
belong to Medicine, and those which belong to Cookery, would be all
confounded together. You now therefore know what I assert Rhetoric to
be: The counterpart of Cookery. Rhetoric is to the mind what Cookery is
to the body.

“Perhaps, now, I have acted unaccountably, inasmuch as I would not let
you make a long speech, and I have made one myself. But you ought to
excuse me, for when I spoke concisely you did not understand me, nor
could make any use of my answer: you needed a long dissertation. If,
then, you find that I cannot understand, or make use of your answers, do
you also prolong your discourse; but, if I can, permit me to do so, for
that is but just. And now, if you can make any thing of my present
answer, do so.”

“What!” asked Polus, “Do you affirm rhetoric to be Adulation?” S. “I
said, a branch of Adulation.” P. “Do good orators appear to you to be of
mean account in a state, as being adulators?” S. “Do you mean this as a
question, or is it the beginning of a speech?” P. “As a question.” S.
“They do not seem to me to be of any account at all.” P. “How, of no
account? Are they not the most powerful persons in a state?” S. “Not if
you mean that to be powerful is a good thing for the powerful person.”
P. “But I do.” S. “Then orators appear to me to be less powerful in a
state than any other persons whatever.” P. “What! Do they not, like
despots, put to death whomsoever they desire, and deprive of his
property and expel from the state whomsoever they think fit?” S. “I am
continually in doubt whether you are giving these things as your own
opinion, or asking me for mine.” P. “I am asking you.” S. “Then you are
asking me two questions at once.” P. “How so?” S. “Did you not say, that
orators, like despots, put to death whomsoever they desire, and deprive
of his property and expel from the state whomsoever they think fit?”* P.
“I did.” S. “These I call two questions; and I will answer both of them.
I say that orators, and despots too, have scarcely any power at all in a
state, inasmuch as they accomplish scarcely any of the things which they
desire; but they certainly effect what they think fit.” P. “But this
surely is to be powerful.” S. “Not on your showing.” P. “Not on my
showing? but it is on my showing.” S. “Not so indeed, since you said
that to be powerful was a good thing for the powerful person.” P. “I say
so still.” S. “Do you think it a good thing for a person to accomplish
what he thinks fit, if he is without good sense? and is this what you
call being powerful?” P. “Not I.” S. “Then if you would refute him, you
must show that orators have good sense, and that rhetoric is an art, not
an adulation. But though you should leave me unrefuted, orators and
despots Edition: current; Page: [111] who do whatever they think fit in
a state, will be never the better for it. Power, you say, is something
good. But to effect what we think fit, being without good sense, you
yourself allow to be a bad thing.” P. “I do.” S. “How then can orators
or despots be powerful in a state, unless you prove against me that they
effect what they desire?” P. “What a man!” S. “I say, they do not effect
what they desire.” P. “Did you not admit that they effect what they
think fit?” S. “I admit it still.” P. “Then they effect what they
desire.” S. “I say not.” P. “Although they effect what they think fit?”
S. “Yes.” P. “You talk nonsense.” S. “Do not inveigh against me, most
worthy Polus: but if you have any questions to put, show that I am
wrong; if not, do you yourself answer.” P. “I am willing to answer, that
I may know what it is you mean.”

S. “Does it seem to you that people, on each occasion, desire the thing
itself which they do, or the thing for the sake of which they do it? For
instance, does a person who takes medicine, desire the actual thing
which he does, viz. to drink the potion and suffer pain, or the thing
for the sake of which he does it, viz. to be in health?” P. “Evidently,
to be in health.” S. “And navigators, or other men of business, do not
desire the actual thing which they do (for who would desire all sorts of
trouble and danger?) but they desire the thing for the sake of which all
this is done, viz., to be rich?” P. “Very true.” S. “And the case is the
same with every thing, is it not? When we do one thing for the sake of
another, what we desire is not the thing which we do, but the thing for
the sake of which we do it.” P. “Certainly.” S. “Now are not all things
either good or bad, or between the two, neither good nor bad?” P.
“Certainly.” S. “Wisdom, health, riches, and so forth, you call good,
and their opposites bad.” P. “Undoubtedly.” S. “And the things which are
neither good nor bad, are those which sometimes partake of good,
sometimes of bad, sometimes of neither; as to sit, or to walk, or to
run, or to sail, or as wood and stone, and so forth.” P. “True.” S. “Do
we perform these indifferent things for the sake of the good things, or
the good things for the sake of the indifferent things?” P. “We perform
the indifferent things for the sake of the good things.” S. “Then, when
we walk, we do so in pursuit of good, and when we stand, it is for the
same reason.” P. “Yes.” S. “And if we kill any one, or banish him, or
confiscate his property, it is because we think it better to do so, than
not.” P. “Certainly.” S. “Those then who do these things, do them for
the sake of good.” P. “Granted.” S. “But we admitted that we desire, not
those things which we perform for the sake of other things, but those
other things, for the sake of which we perform them.” P. “Most true.” S.
“Then we do not desire simply to kill men or banish them, or to deprive
them of their property: but we desire to do these things if they be
beneficial, and not to do them if they be hurtful. For, as you say, we
desire the things which are good, but do not Edition: current; Page:
[112] desire those which are indifferent, or bad. Do I say true? Why do
you not answer?” P. “It is true.” S. “Then, this being granted, if any
one, being an orator or a despot, kills another or takes any of his
property or banishes him, thinking it to be a good thing for him to do
so, when in reality it is a bad thing, this person does what he thinks
fit?” P. “Yes.” S. “But does he do what he desires, if these things are
in reality bad? Why do you not answer?” P. “It appears that he does not
do what he desires.” S. “Can such a person then be said to be powerful
in a state, if to be powerful be, as you say, a good thing?” P. “He
cannot.” S. “Then I said truly when I affirmed that it was possible to
effect in a state whatever we think fit, and yet not to be powerful, nor
effect what we desire.”

P. “So, then, Socrates, you would not like that it should be allowed you
to accomplish in the state whatever seems fit to you, nor do you feel
envy when you see a man killing, or imprisoning, or depriving of their
property whomsoever he pleases.”

“Do you mean,” answered Socrates, “justly or unjustly?” P. “In whichever
way it is done, is it not enviable?” S. “It is not proper to envy the
unenviable nor the miserable, but to pity them.” P. “What! do you think
it is thus with the persons whom I describe?” S. “Undoubtedly.” P. “Does
he who kills whomsoever it seems best to him, and kills them justly,
appear to you miserable and pitiable?” S. “No, but neither does he
appear enviable.” P. “Did you not, just now, call him miserable?” S.
“Him who kills unjustly, I called miserable, and pitiable too; him who
kills justly, unenviable.” P. “Certainly he who is killed unjustly is
pitiable and miserable.” S. “Less so than his slayer, and less so than
he who is slain justly.” P. “How so?” S. “Because to do injury is the
greatest of evils.” P. “The greatest? Is it not a still greater evil to
be injured?” S. “By no means.” P. “Would you prefer to be injured,
rather than do an injury?” S. “I should not prefer either, but if one or
the other were unavoidable, I should choose rather to be injured than to
injure.” P. “Would you not consent to be a despot?” S. “If by being a
despot you mean what I mean, I should not.” P. “I mean, as I said
before, being allowed to do in the state whatever we think fit; to kill,
and banish, and do every thing according to our will.” S. “Most
excellent person, listen to me. Suppose that I were to go out into the
market-place when it is full, with a poniard under my arm, and to say to
you, Polus, I have obtained a splendid despotism; for if it seem good to
me that any one of all these men should die, he will die upon the spot;
if I will that he should be wounded, he will be wounded; if that his
cloak should be torn, it will be torn; so great is my power in this
state. And suppose that, you being incredulous, I were to show you my
poniard. You would probably answer, that by this account every body must
be powerful, for in this way any one might set fire to any house, or to
the docks and all the vessels in the harbour, if he thought fit.
Edition: current; Page: [113] But to be powerful does not consist in
being able to do what we think fit.” P. “Not in this manner, certainly.”
S. “Now can you tell what is your objection to this power?” P. “Surely.”
S. “What is it?” P. “That a person who acts thus must inevitably be
punished.” S. “And to be punished is an evil?” P. “Certainly.” S. “Then
it again appears to you, that to be powerful is good, only when, doing
what we think fit, we do what is for our benefit; and this is what is
meant by being powerful: without this, it is evil, and is not power but
impotence.

“Let us consider further in this manner. It is sometimes better to do
the thing which we were talking about, to kill, and confiscate, and
banish; and sometimes not?” P. “Undoubtedly.” S. “This we are both of us
agreed in?” P. “We are.” S. “In what cases do you say it is better, and
in what otherwise? Tell me where you draw the line.” P. “Do you,
Socrates, answer this question yourself.” S. “If you prefer to be a
listener, I say, that when it is done justly it is better, and when
unjustly, it is worse.” P. “Could not a child refute what you now
assert?” S. “I shall be very thankful to the child, and equally so to
you, if you refute me, and free me from error. Do not be tired of doing
a service to a friend, but refute.” P. “There is no occasion to go very
far back in order to refute you. What happened only the other day is
sufficient to prove that many unjust persons are happy.” S. “What are
these things?” P. “Do you see Archelaus, the king of Macedonia?” S. “If
I do not see him I have heard of him.” P. “Does he appear to you happy
or miserable?” S. “I do not know, for I have never conversed with the
man.” P. “What! could you know that he was happy by conversing with him,
and not otherwise?” S. “Certainly not.” P. “Then you will say that you
do not know whether the Great King (of Persia) is happy?” S. “And I
shall say truly; for I do not know in what condition he is with respect
to mental cultivation and justice.” P. “What! Does all happiness consist
in this?” S. “As I say, it does; for I affirm that an excellent man or
woman is happy, an unjust and wicked one wretched.” P. “Then Archelaus
is wretched, by your account?” S. “If he be unjust.” P. “But how can it
be denied that he is unjust?” and here Polus relates a series of crimes
by which Archelaus had risen to the throne, intermixing much sarcastic
irony on the notion of Socrates that he was unhappy, and ends by saying,
“and do you suppose there is so much as a single Athenian, beginning
with yourself, who would not rather be Archelaus than any other of the
Macedonians?”

Socrates replied, “At the commencement of our conversation I praised you
for being well versed in rhetoric, but said that you had neglected
discussion. Is this the argument with which a child could confute me?
Does this, in your opinion, refute my assertion that an unjust man is
not happy? How, pray? for I do not admit a word of what you have said.”
P. “Because you will not; for you in reality think as I say.” S. “My
good friend, you Edition: current; Page: [114] attempt to refute me
rhetorically, in the manner of what is called refutation in the courts
of justice. In those courts, one man thinks that he refutes another, if
he can produce many witnesses of good reputation in behalf of what he
says, while his adversary can produce only one, or none at all. But this
sort of refutation is good for nothing as respects truth: for it
sometimes happens that a great number of witnesses, and people who are
thought to be of some worth, bear false witness. And now, on the subject
of which you are speaking, very nearly all the Athenians, and foreigners
too, will join in your assertion, and if you wish to produce witnesses
in proof that I am wrong, you may have Nicias, if you please, and
Aristocrates, and the whole family of Pericles, and, in short, any one
you please in this city. But I, who am but one man, do not acknowledge
it; for you do not compel me to do so, but attempt to bear me down and
deprive me of my substance, of the Truth, by producing false witnesses
against me. I, on the contrary, think I have done nothing, unless I can
produce you, yourself, who are but one, as a witness on my side. Nor do
I think that you have accomplished any thing, unless I, one single
person, bear witness in your behalf, without regard to any of the
others. Yours is one kind of refutation, as you and many others think;
there is another kind, as I think. Let us compare them, and see whether
they differ from one another. The things respecting which we are
disputing are no trifling things, but are nearly those respecting which
it is most honourable to know, and most disgraceful to be ignorant; for
it is, in short, to know or not to know, who is and who is not happy.
You think, that a person who is unjust, and acts unjustly, may be
happy?” P. “I do.” S. “I say that it is not possible. This, then, is one
point in dispute. Next, will a person who commits injustice be happy if
he be brought to justice and punishment?” P. “By no means; in that case
he would be most wretched.” S. “But if he do not suffer punishment, he
is happy?” P. “Yes.” S. “In my opinion, he who is unjust and commits
injustice, is in any case miserable; but more miserable if he be unjust
and escape from punishment, than if he be brought to justice and suffer
punishment. You have refuted my first opinion, have you not?” P. “Yes.”
S. “Will you refute the second, too?” P. “That, truly, is still more
difficult to refute than the first!” S. “Not difficult, but impossible;
for the truth cannot be refuted.” P. “How! If a man is detected aiming
unjustly at the tyranny, and being detected, is put to the rack and
hewed in pieces, and has his eyes burnt out, and after suffering both in
himself and in his wife and children the uttermost insult and contumely,
is at last impaled or crucified, will he be more happy than if he
succeeds in his enterprise, and attaining despotic power, continues
master of the state to the end of his days, envied and felicitated both
by his countrymen and by foreigners? Is this what you say it is
impossible to refute?” S. “You are inveighing now, and not refuting, as
a little while ago Edition: current; Page: [115] you were calling
witnesses. But pray refresh my memory; are you supposing him to aim
unjustly at the tyranny?” P. “Certainly.” S. “Then neither of them,
neither he who is punished nor he who escapes, is the more happy; for of
two miserable persons it cannot be said that either is the happier; but
he who escapes and attains the tyranny, is the more wretched. What is
this, Polus; do you laugh? Is this another mode of refutation, when any
thing is asserted, to laugh, instead of answering it?” P. “Do you not
think yourself answered, when you say what no person in the world would
say except yourself? Ask any of the bystanders.”

Socrates replied, “I am no politician, and last year, when it fell to me
by lot to be a member of the Council of Five Hundred, and when the turn
came for my tribe to preside, and it was my duty to take the votes, I
was laughed at for not knowing how to do it. Do not, therefore, bid me
take the votes of the bystanders; but if you cannot produce a better
refutation of what I asserted than this, let me take my turn, and try to
show you what I consider to be a refutation; for I know how to produce
one witness in proof of my assertion, viz., the person with whom I am
speaking; but the large number I let alone. I know how to take the vote
of one person, but with the many I do not converse. Let us see,
therefore, whether you are willing, in your turn, to submit yourself to
refutation, by answering the questions which are asked of you. For my
opinion is, that both you and I, and all men, consider it a greater evil
to do an injury than to suffer one, and to be unpunished than to be
punished.” P. “And I say that neither I nor any other person is of that
opinion. Would you yourself rather be injured than injure?” S. “And you,
too, and every one.” P. “No such thing.” S. “Then will you answer?” P.
“Yes; for I greatly desire to hear what you will find to say.”

S. “Suffer me then to interrogate you, beginning from the very
commencement. Do you think it a greater evil to be injured, or to
injure?” P. “To be injured.” S. “Which do you think the more ignoble, to
be injured or to injure? answer me.” P. “To injure.” S. “Then if it be
more ignoble, it is more evil.” P. “By no means.” S. “I understand: you
do not, it seems, consider Noble and Good, Ignoble and Evil, to be the
same things?” P. “Certainly not.”

S. “Listen then. When you call any thing noble, as a noble countenance,
or air, or figure, or voice, or conduct; what is it that you look to in
calling them noble? Do you not, for instance, affirm of a man, that he
has a noble person, either on account of some use, to which his person
is subservient, or of some pleasure which it produces to those who see
it? Can you assign any other reason?” P. “I cannot.” S. “And are not all
noble voices, and persons, and so forth, called so, either on account of
some pleasure, or some utility, or both?” P. “Yes.” S. “And what is
noble in conduct and action, is called noble on no other account, but
either because it is useful, or Edition: current; Page: [116] agreeable,
or both.” P. “So it appears to me. And you define the noble well, when
you define it by the Pleasant and the Good.” S. “Then the ignoble must
be defined by the contraries of these, Pain and Evil.” P. “Of
necessity.” S. “When, therefore, of two noble things, one is the nobler,
it is so because it excels the other in pleasantness, or usefulness, or
in both.” P. “Certainly.” S. “And when, of two ignoble things, the one
is more ignoble than the other, it is so, by exceeding it either in
pain, in evil, or in both.” P. “Yes.”

S. “Let us now call to mind what was said respecting Injuring and Being
Injured. Did you not say, that to be injured was more evil, but to
injure, more ignoble?” P. “I did.” S. “Then, if to injure be more
ignoble than to be injured, it must either be more painful, or more
evil, or both.” P. “No doubt.” S. “Let us then consider, in the first
place—Is to injure, more painful than to be injured? Does the person who
does an injury suffer more pain than he who undergoes it?” P. “Certainly
not.” S. “It does not then exceed in painfulness.” P. “No.” S. “If not
in painfulness, certainly not in both.” P. “So it seems.” S. “Then it
must exceed in evil.” P. “It appears so.” S. “Then to injure is more
evil than to be injured.” P. “It is evident.” S. “It was admitted some
time ago by you, in behalf of yourself, and of mankind in general, that
to injure is more ignoble than to be injured?” P. “Yes.” S. “And now it
has appeared to be more evil.” P. “It has.” S. “Would you then prefer
that which is more ignoble and more evil, to that which is less so? Do
not fear to answer, for you will receive no hurt, but nobly give
yourself up to the argument as to a physician, and either admit or deny
my proposition.” P. “I would not prefer it.” S. “Would any one?” P.
“According to this argument it would appear not.” S. “I spoke truth,
then, when I said that neither you, nor I, nor any one, would choose
rather to do than to suffer an injury; for it is a greater evil.” P. “It
seems so.” S. “You see, then, the difference between this mode of
refutation and the other. You had the suffrages of all the world, except
me; but I am contented with the suffrage and testimony of you alone,
and, having taken your vote, I have nothing to say to the others. So
much for this. Let us now consider the other question, Whether to commit
injustice, and be punished, is, as you thought, the greatest of evils,
or, as I thought, a less evil than impunity. To commit injustice, and be
punished, is the same thing as to be punished justly, is it not?” P. “It
is.” S. “Can it be denied, that whatever is just is noble, in so far as
it is just? Consider and say.” P. “It seems to me that it is so.” S.
“And consider this likewise: if any thing acts, is it not necessary that
there should be something which is acted upon?” P. “Certainly.” S. “And
is not the one acted upon in the same manner in which the other acts?
For example, if you strike, there must be something which is struck?” P.
“Yes.” S. “And if you strike hard, the thing which is struck is struck
hard.” P. “Certainly.” S. “Then Edition: current; Page: [117] that which
is acted upon, is affected in the same manner in which the thing which
acts affects. Whatever the agent acts, the patient suffers the same.” P.
“I admit it.” S. “Now, whether is to suffer punishment, a mode of
acting, or of being acted upon?” P. “Of being acted upon.” S. “Of being
acted upon, then, by some agent?” P. “Certainly, by the punisher.” S.
“But he who punishes rightly, punishes justly.” P. “Yes.” S. “Then he
acts justly.” P. “Certainly.” S. “Then he who is punished, is punished
justly. But what is just, we have agreed is noble.” P. “We have.” S.
“Then the agent who punishes does what is noble, and the patient who is
punished suffers what is noble.” P. “Yes.” S. “But, if he suffers what
is noble, he suffers what is good, for noble must mean either pleasant
or useful.” P. “Of necessity.” S. “Then he who suffers punishment,
suffers what is good.” P. “So it seems.” S. “Then he is benefited.” P.
“Yes.” S. “In what way? I suppose by becoming in a better state of mind,
if he is punished justly.” P. “It is probable.” S. “Then he who suffers
punishment gets rid of the vice of the mind.” P. “Yes.” S. “Does he not
then get rid of the greatest of all evils? Let us look at it thus:—Is
there any possible vice or badness in our pecuniary condition, except
poverty?” P. “None.” S. “In our bodily condition is there any possible
defect, except weakness, and disease, and deformity, and so forth?” P.
“None.” S. “Is there not also a vicious state of the mind?” P. “There
is.” S. “And does not this consist of injustice, and ignorance, and
cowardice, and so forth?” P. “Yes.” S. “Then you have enumerated the
three characteristic vices of the estate, the body and the mind; and
these are, poverty, disease, and injustice?” P. “Yes.” S. “And which of
these vices is the most ignoble? Is it not injustice, and, generally
speaking, the vice of the mind?” P. “By far.” S. “And if it is the most
ignoble, it is the worst?” P. “How so?” S. “The most ignoble is either
the most painful, the most detrimental, or both; as results from our
previous admissions.” P. “Certainly.” S. “But injustice, and, generally,
the vice of the mind, have been granted by us to be the most ignoble of
all kinds of vice?” P. “Yes.” S. “Then it must be either the most
painful, or the most pernicious, or both.” P. “It must.” S. “Now, is
injustice, or intemperance, or cowardice, or ignorance more excruciating
than poverty or sickness?” P. “I apprehend not.” S. “Then the vice of
the mind must surpass the vices of the body and of the estate, to an
extraordinary degree in mischievousness, since it does not surpass them
in painfulness.” P. “So it seems.” S. “But that which surpasses all
things in mischievousness must be the greatest of evils.” P. “Yes.” S.
“Then injustice, and intemperance, and, in a word, the vice of the mind,
is the greatest of evils.” P. “So it appears.”

S. “What art is it which cures us of poverty? Is it not that of the man
of business?” P. “It is.” S. “And what art cures us of disease? Is it
not medicine?” P. “Undoubtedly.” S. “And what art cures us of wickedness
Edition: current; Page: [118] and injustice? If this be not immediately
obvious, let us look at it in another way. To whom do we hand over those
whose bodies are disordered?” P. “To the physician.” S. “And to whom do
we hand over those who are unjust and lawless?” P. “You mean, to the
magistrate.” S. “In order to suffer punishment?” P. “Yes.” S. “And those
who punish rightly, do so by the exercise of justice.” P. “They do.” S.
“The art of the man of business, then, rids us of poverty, medicine rids
us of disease, legal justice rids us of injustice and intemperance?” P.
“So it seems.” S. “Which of these three, then, is the most noble?” P.
“Justice, by far.” S. “Then it either produces the greatest pleasure, or
the greatest benefit, or both?” P. “Yes.” S. “Is it a pleasant thing to
be under the hands of the physician?” P. “No.” S. “But it is useful?” P.
“Yes.” S. “For it cures us of a great evil; so that it is for our good
to suffer the pain, and receive health.” P. “Undoubtedly.” S. “But
whether is he most happy who undergoes medical treatment, or he who has
not been ill at all?” P. “Certainly the latter. For happiness is not to
get rid of an evil, but never to have had it.” S. “But of two persons
who have a malady, either of the body or of the mind, which is the most
miserable, he who undergoes medical treatment and is cured, or he who
undergoes no medical treatment and continues ill?” P. “The last is the
most miserable.” S. “But to suffer punishment was, we admitted, to be
freed from the worst of evils, viz., wickedness.” P. “It was.” S. “For
punishment chastens men, and makes them more just, and is a kind of
medicine for the vice of the mind.” P. “Yes.” S. “He then is happiest
who has not the vice of the mind: the next happiest is he who is cured
of it, viz., he who is reproved, and undergoes punishment. He who is
afflicted with injustice, and is not cured, has the worst life of all;
and that is, he who commits the greatest crimes, with the greatest
success, and escapes all reproof, and all punishment; as you say is the
case with Archelaus, and other despots and orators.” P. “So it appears.”
S. “For their case is like that of a person afflicted with the worst
diseases, who should so manage as never to be punished by physicians for
the vicious state of his body, by undergoing medical treatment; being
afraid, like a child, of cutting and burning, because it is painful. Do
you not think so?” P. “I do.” S. “And being ignorant, it would seem, of
the value of health, and the excellence which belongs to the body, those
who fly from punishment appear, from our admissions, to be in a similar
situation: they see the painfulness of it, but are blind to the utility,
and know not how much more wretched it is to be afflicted with an
unsound mind, than with an unsound body. They therefore use all means
which may aid them in escaping from punishment and from cure, by
collecting money, and obtaining friends, and acquiring the power of
persuasion. But if our admissions were correct, do you see what follows,
or shall we state it particularly?” P. “If you have no objection.” S.
“Is not injustice and doing injury the greatest of evils, punishment the
cure of it, impunity the permanence of it, to be Edition: current; Page:
[119] unjust and be punished the greatest of all evils, except one, to
be unjust with impunity the greatest of all?” P. “So it appears.” S. “If
this be the case, what, then, is the great use of rhetoric? It appears
from our admissions, that it is most of all incumbent upon every one to
guard himself against the evil of injustice.” P. “Certainly.” S. “But if
he, or any one in whom he takes interest, should commit injustice, he
ought voluntarily to court a speedy punishment, and go to the
magistrate, as he would to the physician, as fast as he can, in order
that the disease may not become inveterate by age, and taint his
constitution, and be incurable. Does not this necessarily follow from
our former admissions?” P. “What else can we say?” S. “Rhetoric, then,
is of no use to us for defending our own injustice, or that of our
friends, or our country. We ought, on the contrary, to accuse ourselves
in the first instance, and next our relatives and our friends, and not
to conceal our transgressions, but bring them to light, that we may
suffer punishment, and be restored to health; not caring for the pain,
but, if we have merited stripes, giving ourselves up to the stripe; if
imprisonment, to the prison; if death, to death; and employing rhetoric
for the accusation of ourselves, and of those who are dear to us, that
their guilt may be made manifest, and they may be freed from the
greatest of evils, that of injustice.—Is it not so?” P. “It appears to
me extremely paradoxical, but, from our previous admissions, it cannot
perhaps be escaped from.” S. “Then we must either refute our admissions,
or grant these conclusions.” P. “Yes.” “On the other hand,” (continued
Socrates,) “if we wish to do evil to any one, to an enemy for instance,
we ought indeed to avoid being ourselves injured by him; but, if he
injure any other person, we ought to exert ourselves in every manner, by
word and deed, to save him from being brought to justice; and, if he be
indicted, we should contrive that he may escape, and not suffer
punishment; but, if he has possessed himself wrongfully of much wealth,
may not be compelled to refund it, but may expend it on himself and his
connexions unjustly and impiously; and, if he has committed crimes
worthy of death, that he may not die: if possible, never, but may be
immortal in his wickedness; but, if not, that he may live as long in it
as he can. For such purposes rhetoric may be of use; but, for one who is
not to commit injustice, I cannot see that it can be of any great
utility.”

The dramatic unity of the Gorgias is so perfect, that it must suffer
much by being divided, and it is to be regretted that space compels us
to postpone a part of our abstract till next month. As a sudden turn
takes place in the dialogue at this point, and a new interlocutor is
introduced, this seems the most convenient place at which we can for the
present terminate.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [120]
In the discussion, first with Gorgias, and afterwards with Polus,
Socrates had remained the victor, and had forced the latter most
reluctantly to acknowledge that to do injustice is a greater evil than
to suffer it, and that to do injustice and escape unpunished is a
greater evil than to suffer punishment: and Polus seems to have been
effectually reduced to silence, for he takes no further part in this
dialogue. But Socrates has still to encounter a more daring and less
scrupulous antagonist than either of the two former.

Callicles, the host of Gorgias, at whose house the dispute was carried
on, could now no longer contain himself. “Tell me,” said he, (addressing
Chærephon,) “is Socrates in earnest, or in jest?” “He appears to me,”
answered Chærephon, “to be remarkably in earnest: but there is nothing
like asking himself.” “By the Gods,” resumed Callicles, “I have a mind
to do so. Tell me, Socrates, are we to consider you as serious, or in
jest? for if you are serious, and if what you now say is true, all human
life is at present topsy-turvy, and we are all doing the very contrary
of what we ought.”

“If, O Callicles,” answered Socrates, “men did not resemble one another
in their modes of being affected; if one of us had an affection peculiar
to himself, he could not very easily make another man comprehend it. I
say this, because you and I are affected in the very same manner, being
both of us in love, but with different objects; myself with Philosophy,
you with the Athenian People. And I perceive that you, clever as you
are, never know how to contradict any thing which your mistress affirms,
but change backwards and forwards along with its changes. If you say any
thing in the assembly, and the Athenian people say otherwise, you give
it up, and say what the people desire; for you are unable to resist the
will and the words of your mistress. So that if, when you say any of the
things which you say for your love’s sake, any person should be
surprised at the strangeness of them, you would say to him, if you had a
mind to speak the truth, that unless somebody will stop your mistress
from saying these things, he will never be able to stop you. Imagine,
then, that I am in the same situation with yourself, and do not be
surprised that I say these things, but stop my mistress, Philosophy,
from saying them: for she still continues to say the things which you
are now wondering at; and you yourself were present when they were said.
Either, then, confute her, by proving, that to be unjust, and being so,
to escape punishment, is not, as I affirm, the worst of evils; or if you
leave this unrefuted, Callicles will never agree with you, O Callicles,
but will be in contradiction to you all your life. I should think it
better that my lyre should be discordant, or that the choral dance led
by me should be out of time, or that all mankind should be out of
harmony with me, rather than that I myself should be out of tune, and
not consonant with myself.”

Edition: current; Page: [121]
Callicles replied, “You are a true haranguer, and you have now made this
triumphant harangue, merely because Polus has done what he himself
charged Gorgias with doing. When you asked Gorgias whether, if a person
who wished to learn rhetoric, came to him ignorant of justice, he would
teach it to him, Gorgias said Yes, because he was ashamed to say No, on
account of the custom of men, because they would be indignant if he said
that he would not; and Polus remarked this, and said, that this
admonition was what forced Gorgias to contradict himself, and that this
is what delights you: and he ridiculed you, at that time, as I thought,
very justly. But now the same thing has happened to himself. What I do
not admire in Polus is, that he admitted that to injure is more ignoble
than to be injured. It was by this admission that he was entangled, and
had his mouth shut up, being ashamed to say what he thought. For you,
pretending to pursue truth, always drive the argument to an invidious
appeal to common prejudices, making it turn upon the things which are
not noble by nature, but only by institution. These two things, nature
and institution, are, for the most part, contrary to one another: and if
a man is ashamed, and does not dare to say what he thinks, he is forced
to contradict himself. But the wise invention which enables you to force
him to contradict himself is a mere quibble: when a man is speaking of
institution, you interpret it of nature, and when of nature, you
interpret it of institution. For instance, on this subject of injuring
and being injured, Polus spoke of what was more ignoble by institution,
and you met him with what was more ignoble by nature. By nature, to be
injured is not only worse, but also more ignoble, than to injure: by
institution only is it more ignoble to injure. To be injured is not the
attribute of a man, but of a slave, fitter to die than to live, who, if
he is wronged or insulted, is not capable of protecting himself nor
those whom he cares for. But the makers of institutions are the Many,
and the weak. They make their laws, and dispense their praise and blame,
with a view to themselves, and to their own advantage. Fearing lest the
more energetic, who are capable of attaining superiority, should attain
it over them, they call it base and unjust to take more than other
people, and even affirm that this is precisely what constitutes
injustice. For they, being the feebler, are contented with equality. By
institution, therefore, to aim at superiority is unjust and ignoble, and
is termed, to do injury. But Nature herself shows that it is just for
the better to take more than the worse, and the stronger than the
weaker. She shows, in the other animals, and in whole nations and races
of men, that, for the stronger to govern the weaker, and to take the
larger share, is true justice. With what justice did Xerxes make war on
Greece, or his father, Darius, on the Scythians? They did what was just
by nature, and by the laws of nature, not by those which we devise,
catching the best and strongest among us, like lions, when they are
young, and Edition: current; Page: [122] enslaving them by fictions and
old songs, telling them that nobleness and justice consist in equality.
But if a man arises, adequately endowed by nature, he breaks through,
and shakes off these fetters, and, trampling upon our statutes and our
charmed words, and all institutions contrary to nature, rises up our
master, no longer our slave, and the justice of nature shines forth in
him. Pindar indicates this, in the ode in which he says that Hercules
took away the oxen of Geryon, neither buying them nor receiving them by
gift;[*] this being natural justice, and all the possessions of the
worse and the weaker, belonging of right to the better and the stronger.
This is true; and you will know it, if you abandon philosophy, and apply
yourself to greater pursuits. Philosophy is a graceful thing, when it is
moderately cultivated, in youth; but if any one occupies himself with it
beyond the proper age, it ruins him. For, however great may be his
natural capacity, if he philosophizes too long, he must of necessity
continue inexperienced in all those things which one who would be a
great and eminent man ought to be experienced in. He must be
unacquainted with the laws of his country, and with the mode of
influencing other men in the intercourse of life, whether private or
public, and with the pleasures and passions of men; in short, with human
character and manners. And when such men are called upon to act, whether
on a public or private occasion, they expose themselves to ridicule,
just as politicians do when they come to your conversations, and attempt
to cope with you in argument. For every man, as Euripides says, occupies
himself with that in which he finds himself superior; that in which he
is inferior he avoids, and speaks ill of it, but praises what he excels
in, thinking that in doing so he is praising himself.[†] The best thing,
in my opinion, is to partake of both. It is good to partake of
philosophy, by way of education, and it is not disgraceful in a young
man to philosophize. But if he continues to do so when he grows older,
he becomes ridiculous, and I feel towards him as I should towards a
grown person who lisped, and played at childish plays. When a child does
so, in whom it is becoming, I am pleased, and it appears to me graceful,
and suitable to his age; and if I hear a child speaking plain, like a
grown person, it is disagreeable to me, and has a servile appearance.
But if I hear a grown person lisp, or see him at play, I think it
unmanly and contemptible. So I think of those who philosophize. When I
see a young man philosophizing, I think it commendable and becoming, and
consider him as of a liberal mind, and hold that he who does not
philosophize at that age, is vulgar-minded, and will never feel himself
capable of any thing noble and exalted. But when I Edition: current;
Page: [123] see an old man still continuing to philosophize, I think he
deserves to be flogged. However great his natural talents, he is under
the necessity of avoiding the assembly and public places, where, as the
poet says, men become eminent,[*] and to hide himself, and pass his life
whispering to two or three striplings in a corner, but never speaking
out any thing great and bold and liberal. I, Socrates, feel towards you
as your friend, and am inclined to say to you what Zethus says to
Amphion in Euripides,[†] that you neglect what you ought to attend to,
and waste a mind by nature so powerful, in trifling and child’s play. Do
not be angry, for I speak solely from good will towards you. Does it not
seem to you a disgraceful thing to be as you are, and as those others
are who make philosophy their occupation? If any one should charge you
with some crime, which you had not committed, and carry you off to
prison, you would gape and stare, and would not know what to say; and
when brought to trial, however contemptible and weak your accuser might
be, if he chose to indict you capitally, you would perish. Can this be
wisdom, which, if it takes hold of a gifted man, destroys the excellence
of his nature, rendering him incapable of preserving himself or others
from the greatest dangers, enabling his enemies to plunder him of all
his property, and reducing him to the situation of those who, by the
sentence of a court of justice, have been deprived of their civil
rights? so that (though it may sound harshly) a man might even strike
him a blow with impunity. Be persuaded by me: give up confutation, leave
these clevernesses to others, and do not emulate those who gain these
petty victories, but those who have wealth and reputation, and the other
blessings of life.”

Socrates replied, “If my soul were golden, do you not think that I
should be glad to discover one of those touchstones with which they try
the purity of gold, that I might try my soul by it, and if it stood the
test, I might know that I am as I should be, and need no further test?”
C. “Why do you ask this question?” S. “Because I think that I have found
such a treasure in you.” C. “How?” S. “I know that whatever of my
opinions you give your assent to, must be true. He who is capable of
serving as a touchstone on the subject of right and wrong modes of life,
must have three qualities, all of which you possess: knowledge, good
will, and frankness. I meet with many persons who are not capable of
bringing me to the test, because they are not wise as you are. Others
are wise, but are not willing to speak the truth to me, because they do
not care for me as you do. Our friends Gorgias and Polus are wise, and
well disposed toward me, but deficient in frankness, and more shamefaced
than they should be. For how can they be otherwise, Edition: current;
Page: [124] they who are so much ashamed, that they are driven by shame
to contradict themselves before a numerous company, and on the most
important subjects. But you possess all the qualities which others are
destitute of. You are adequately instructed, as many of the Athenians
would aver. You are well-disposed towards me; and how do I know this?
Because I am aware that you and three others, Tisander, Andron, and
Nausicydes, carry on your studies in common, and I have heard you
discussing together, how far wisdom ought to be pursued; and I know that
the opinion which prevailed among you, was, that you should not be too
eager to philosophize accurately, and should be on your guard not to be
spoilt by becoming more wise than is advisable. When therefore I find
you giving me the same advice which you give to your most intimate
friends, it is a sufficient proof of your good will towards me. Again,
that you are capable of speaking out, boldly and without shame, you
yourself say, and the speech you just now made is a proof of it. I am
therefore satisfied that if you are brought to agree with me in any
thing which I say, it is sufficiently tried, and does not need any
further test. For you would not admit it either from deficiency of
wisdom, or excess of shame; nor would you concede it with the intent to
deceive me; for you are, as you yourself say, my friend. Our agreement,
therefore, will be the final establishment of truth. This inquiry, in
the course of which I have incurred your animadversions, the inquiry
what a human being should be, and with what he should occupy himself in
youth and in age, is the noblest of all inquiries. If I, in the
regulation of my life, do any thing which I should not do, be assured
that I do not err intentionally, but from ignorance. Do not then relax
in your admonitions, but persevere, and show me what it is which I ought
to practise, and in what manner I may best attain to the practice of it.
And if you find me now admitting what you say, but subsequently not
acting conformably to what I have admitted, think me spiritless and
worthless, and never take the trouble to correct me again.

“Repeat to me, then, from the beginning, what you affirmed to constitute
the Justice which is not merely of institution, but of nature. You said,
if I remember right, that Natural Justice is, for the better to command
the worse, and the more excellent to take more than the more worthless.
Said you not so?” C. “I did, and do.” S. “Do you consider the better,
and the stronger, to be synonymous? You appeared to indicate something
of this sort when you said that great states attack small ones by the
justice of nature, because they are the stronger. Is it possible, then,
to be the better, but at the same time the weaker; or the stronger, but
at the same time the worse? Or, are the stronger and the better,
equivalent expressions?” C. “They are equivalent.” S. “And are not many
by nature stronger than one? You yourself said that the many give laws
to the one.” C. “Certainly.” S. “Then the institutions of the many are
those of the stronger.” Edition: current; Page: [125] C. “Yes.” S. “And
therefore, by your account, of the better.” C. “Certainly.” S. “Then the
institutions of the many are by nature noble, since the many are the
stronger.” C. “Granted.” S. “Now, do not the many think, as you before
observed, that Equality is just, and that it is more ignoble to injure
than to be injured? Do not you, too, suffer yourself to be entrapped by
shamefacedness. Do not the many think that justice consists in equality,
and not in superiority? and that to injure is more ignoble than to be
injured? Do not deny me an answer, in order that, if you agree with me,
I may consider my opinion established by the admission of a competent
judge.” C. “The many are of this opinion.” S. “To injure, then, is more
ignoble than to be injured, not by institution only, but likewise by
nature: and you were wrong when you accused me, saying that Institution
and Nature are contrary to one another, and that I, knowing this,
quibble in argument, interpreting of Institution that which is affirmed
of Nature, and of Nature what is affirmed of Institution.”

C. “This man will never have done trifling. Are you not ashamed,
Socrates, at your age, to cavil at words, and triumph if any one makes a
mistake in a name? Did I not tell you expressly that by the stronger, I
meant the better? Do you think I meant that if a crowd be collected, of
slaves and all kind of persons having no good quality except perhaps
physical force, that whatever they affirm should be right?” S. “This
then is your meaning?” C. “It is.” S. “I conjectured before that this
was what you meant, and I only question you in order to understand you
more clearly. For I do not suppose that you consider two to be better
than one, or your slaves better than yourself because they are stronger.
But pray begin again at the beginning, and tell me whom you mean by the
better, since you do not mean the stronger. And let me intreat you to
instruct me in a milder manner, lest I should withdraw from your
tuition.” C. “You are pleased to be sarcastic.” S. “I swear by Zethus,
in whose name you were so sarcastic upon me, that I am not. But pray
tell me whom you mean by the better.” C. “The worthier.” S. “Do you not
perceive that you yourself are merely paying us in words, and telling us
nothing? Will you not say whether by the better and the stronger, you
understand the more intelligent?” C. “Yes, surely.” S. “Then one
intelligent person is superior to a thousand who are not intelligent,
and ought to rule over them, and to have a larger share than they? Tell
me (and I am not cavilling at words) whether this is your meaning?” C.
“It is. And this is what I call natural justice; that the better and
more intelligent should govern the worse, and be preferred to them.”

S. “Pray explain yourself further. If there were many of us assembled
together, possessing in common a great supply of food and drink; and if
we were people of all descriptions, some of us strong and others weak,
but one of us, being a physician, was more intelligent than the rest on
the subject of Edition: current; Page: [126] diet; would not he be
better and superior, as compared with the rest of us, so far as these
things were concerned?” C. “Certainly.” S. “Ought he, then, as being the
better, to have a larger share of food than the rest? or ought he to be
intrusted, indeed, with the distribution, but not permitted to take a
greater quantity for his own use than any other, on pain of punishment?”
C. “You talk of food, and drink, and physicians, and such stuff, but
that is not what I mean.” S. “Do you not say that the more intelligent
are the better?” C. “I do.” S. “And that the better ought to have the
larger share?” C. “Not of food or of drink.” S. “I understand: of
clothing, perhaps. The man who understands most of weaving, ought to
have the largest coats and the finest, and to walk about with the
greatest number of them on his body.” C. “Why will you talk about
coats?” S. “It is of shoes then, that the person who is most intelligent
respecting them, ought to have the largest share. The shoemaker should
wear the largest shoes, and the greatest number of them at once.” C.
“What stuff is this about shoes!” S. “Or, perhaps, you mean that he who
is intelligent and skilful in agriculture, ought to have the largest
quantity of seed, and employ most of it on his own land.” C. “You always
say the same thing.” S. “On the same subject, I always do.” C. “You will
not cease speaking of tanners and fullers and cooks and physicians, as
if that were what we are talking about.” S. “Will you not tell me, then,
what is the subject in which those who are most intelligent are justly
entitled to superiority? Will you neither tell me, nor suffer me to
guess?” C. “I have told you long ago. Those whom I call the superior and
the better, are not shoemakers, nor cooks, but those who are intelligent
in the affairs of the state, and in the proper mode of administering it;
and not only intelligent but courageous, capable of accomplishing what
they devise, and not faltering by effeminacy of soul.”

S. “Your complaint of me, and mine of you, are very different. You blame
me for always saying the same thing; I, on the contrary, blame you, for
never saying the same thing on the same subject. You first defined the
better to be the stronger; then, the more intelligent; and now you say
that they are the more courageous. Pray tell me, once for all, who they
are.” C. “I have told you, that they are the more intelligent in public
affairs, and the more courageous. These are the persons who are entitled
to govern the state; and it is just that these should have a larger
share than the rest, since they command, and the others are commanded.”
S. “Do you imply that they should command themselves as well as others?
Or is it not necessary for any one to command himself, but only other
people?” C. “What do you mean by commanding himself?” S. “Only what the
vulgar mean, to be temperate and sober, governing his own pleasures and
desires.” C. “How pleasant you are! You describe a simpleton, and call
him a sober person. How can a person be happy if he is a slave to any
thing? I freely tell you, Edition: current; Page: [127] that what is
noble and just by nature, is that he who would live well, should allow
his desires to attain the greatest possible strength, and never restrain
them; and should be capable, by his courage and talents, of ministering
to his desires, and satisfying them, however great they may be. But of
this the many are incapable; and therefore do they censure such conduct,
to hide their own impotence; and pretend that self-indulgence is a vile
thing; and because they are not capable of ministering to their own
appetites, they praise temperance and justice from mere unmanliness.
For, in reality, to those who are born to a throne, or who are capable,
by their natural endowments, of raising themselves to despotic power,
what can be more ignoble or more contemptible than self-controul? Should
those who have the means of enjoying every pleasure without hinderance
from anybody, erect the law of the many, and their praise and blame,
into a master over themselves? They would be well off in good truth, by
your nobleness, and your justice, and your self-restraint, if they were
prevented by it from giving any preference to their friends over their
enemies, although possessing absolute power in the state. The truth
(which you say is your object) is, that luxury and self-indulgence, if
our means be adequate, are real virtue and happiness: and all other
virtue and happiness are mere pretence, and human devices and
conventions contrary to nature.”

“You keep your promise,” replied Socrates, “to be frank with me; for you
plainly speak out, what other people think, but do not like to say. I
beg you not to relax, until it is clearly established, according to what
rule we ought to live. You say that we ought not to restrain our
desires, but allowing them to be as violent as possible, we should
provide the means of their gratification; and that this is virtue.” C.
“I do.” S. “The common saying then, that those are happy who want
nothing, is incorrect.” C. “Stones, and the dead, would by this account
be the happiest.” S. “But even on your theory, life is a troublesome
thing. Some poet of old compared the soul to a pitcher, and that of a
fool to a pitcher which leaks at the bottom, and is unable to hold
anything: implying that a continent and contented life is preferable to
an insatiable and self-indulgent one. But I suppose you are not very
likely to be convinced by an old song.” C. “Your last observation has
more truth in it.” S. “I will give you another illustration from the
same source. Let us typify the life of the temperate and that of the
self-indulgent, by the image of two persons, each of whom has a large
number of pitchers. The one has them all sound, and filled with honey,
and wine, and milk, and many other things: the streams which supply
these different liquids being scanty, and the supply being obtainable
only by prodigious labour. The one, having filled his pitchers, has no
more trouble, nor any occasion to turn any further streams into his
cellar. The other has it in his power, like the first, to obtain the
supply, though with great difficulty; but his vessels are leaky and
Edition: current; Page: [128] unsound, and he is obliged to employ night
and day in filling them, or suffer the most dreadful torture. Such being
the lives of the temperate and the intemperate man, do I convince you
that the former is more eligible than the latter?” C. “You do not
convince me. For the first man, when he has filled his pitchers, has no
longer any pleasure, but lives, as I said before, like a stone,
inanimate, with neither pleasure nor pain. Pleasure consists in having
as great a stream as possible always pouring in.” S. “Then if much is
poured in, much must run out, and the leaks must be very large?” C.
“Certainly.” S. “This is not the life of a dead man or a stone, but it
is the life of a funnel.”*

S. “You say, it is happiness to be hungry, and, being hungry, to eat.”
C. “Yes.” S. “To be thirsty, and, being thirsty, to drink.” C. “Yes, and
to have all other appetites, and to be able to satisfy them.” S. “I
commend you, for you go on as you have begun. Do not be ashamed. Neither
ought I, apparently, to be shamefaced. And first tell me, whether to
itch constantly, and having the means of scratching, to pass our whole
lives in that operation, would be to live happily?” C. “How unfair you
are, and how fond of appealing to the vulgar.” S. “And therefore did I
embarrass Polus and Gorgias, and make them ashamed; but be not you
ashamed, who are a bold man, but answer me.” C. “I answer then, that the
scratcher would live agreeably.” S. “But if agreeably, then happily.” C.
“Certainly.” S. “See what you will have to answer, if you are pressed
with all the questions which would naturally follow these. Is not the
life of a catamite vile and miserable? Or will you venture to say, that
he too is happy, if all his wants are plentifully supplied?” C. “Are you
not ashamed to lead the argument to such things?” S. “Is it I who lead
it thither, or you, who affirm sweepingly that all who enjoy themselves,
no matter how, are happy; and make no distinction between good pleasures
and bad ones? Tell me again, whether Pleasant and Good are the same, or
whether there is any thing pleasant which is not good?” C. “That my
discourse may not be inconsistent with itself if I say they are
different, I will say that they are the same.” S. “You destroy the whole
argument, and are no longer fitted for inquiring into truth, if you
speak differently from what you think.” C. “It is what you yourself do.”
S. “If I do so, I do wrong, and so do you. But consider whether it be
not true, that Good is not synonymous with Enjoyment, of whatever kind;
for if this were so, the shameful consequences already indicated would
follow, and many others besides.” C. “In your opinion.” S. “Do you in
reality adhere to this opinion?” C. “I do.” S. “Shall we argue upon the
supposition of your being in earnest?” C. “Undoubtedly.”

S. “Tell me then. There is such a thing as knowledge?” C. “Yes.”
Edition: current; Page: [129] S. “You spoke just now of courage
accompanied with knowledge.” C. “I did.” S. “Courage, then, is something
different from knowledge?” C. “Very different.” S. “Are pleasure and
knowledge the same thing, or different?” C. “Very different, most wise
man.” S. “And courage is different from pleasure?” C. “Yes.” S. “You,
then, say that Pleasant and Good are the same thing, but that knowledge
and courage are different from each other, and different from good. And
I, do I admit this, or not?” C. “You do not.” S. “Nor do you either,
when you interpret yourself rightly.

“Is not to be in a good state, the contrary of being in a bad state?” C.
“It is.” S. “Then if they are contrary states, they, like health and
disease, cannot exist together, neither can they both together cease to
exist.” C. “How?” S. “When a man’s eyes are diseased, they are not in
health?” C. “No.” S. “And when he gets rid of the disease, he does not
at the same time get rid of health; for this would be absurd.” C.
“Exceedingly so.” S. “He receives the two things by turns, and gets rid
of them by turns.” C. “Yes.” S. “And the like with strength and
weakness, swiftness and slowness?” C. “Undoubtedly.” S. “Is this
likewise the case with Good and Happiness, and their opposites, Evil and
Misery? Are these acquired and lost, not simultaneously, but
alternately?” C. “Certainly.” S. “Then if we find two things, both of
which we begin to possess together, and both of which we cease to
possess together, it is evident that these things cannot be identical
with Good and Evil. Consider well before you answer.” C. “I perfectly
agree with you.” S. “Let us now return to our first admissions. Is
hunger pleasant or painful? I mean, hunger in itself.” C. “Hunger is
painful: but to eat when we are hungry is pleasant.” S. “I understand:
but to be hungry is in itself painful.” C. “Yes.” S. “And to be
thirsty?” C. “Yes.” S. “And is not all want, and all desire, painful?”
C. “I acknowledge it.” S. “Good. But to drink when you are thirsty is
pleasant.” C. “Yes.” S. “When you are thirsty, is as much as to say,
when you are in pain.” C. “Yes.” S. “But to drink, is to satisfy the
desire, and therefore to be pleased.” C. “Yes.” S. “Then to drink when
you are thirsty, is to be pleased when you are in pain: and both these
things may happen at the same time, whether in the body or in the mind.”
C. “They may.” S. “But it was not possible, you said, to be at the same
time in a good state and in a bad state.” C. “I said so.” S. “Then to be
pleased is not the same thing as to be in a good state, nor to be in
pain, the same as to be in a bad state, and Pleasant and Good are not
the same thing but different things.” C. “I do not understand your
sophisms.” S. “You do, but you feign stupidity. Let us go on a little
further, that you may see how wise you are, who take me to task. Do we
not, when we cease to be thirsty, cease at the same time to receive
pleasure from drinking?” C. “I do not know what you are talking about.”

Gorgias here interposed, and begged Callicles, for his sake, and that of
Edition: current; Page: [130] the bystanders, not to refuse to answer,
in order that the discussion might not be cut short. Callicles replied,
that it was always the way with Socrates, to ask these petty and
frivolous questions. “Of what consequence is that to you?” replied
Gorgias; “the blame is not yours. Pray permit Socrates to carry on the
argument as he pleases.” “Ask then those little frivolous questions of
yours,” said Callicles to Socrates, “since Gorgias wishes it.” “You are
fortunate,” answered Socrates, “in having been initiated into the
greater mysteries before the smaller ones: I thought that it was not
lawful.* Do not our thirst, and our pleasure in drinking, cease
together?” C. “They do.” S. “And so with all our other desires, and the
pleasure of their gratification?” C. “Yes.” S. “Then our pain and our
pleasure both terminate at the same time?” C. “Yes.” S. “But Good and
Evil, you said, do not.” C. “What then?” S. “It follows, that Good and
Pleasant cannot be the same thing, nor Evil and Painful.

“Let us put the argument in another way. People are called good, from
the presence of good in them, as they are called beautiful from the
presence of beauty in them: are they not?” C. “Certainly.” S. “You do
not call the foolish and the cowardly, good? You said, I think, that the
courageous and intelligent were so.” C. “Undoubtedly.” S. “A foolish
child is sometimes pleased?” C. “Yes.” S. “And a foolish man?” C. “I
should think so; but what of that?” S. “Nothing, only answer me. And a
rational man is sometimes pleased, and is also sometimes vexed.” C.
“Yes.” S. “Whether are foolish persons, or rational persons, pleased and
vexed in the highest degree?” C. “I do not think there is much
difference.” S. “That is enough. You have seen cowards in war?” C.
“Certainly.” S. “Whether were the cowards, or the brave men, most
pleased at the retreat of the enemy?” C. “Much the same.” S. “It is
sufficient. Then cowards and foolish people are sometimes pleased. But
when the enemy advance, are the cowards alone vexed, or the brave men
also?” C. “Both.” S. “Both equally?” C. “The cowards, perhaps, in the
greatest degree.” S. “And on the enemy’s retreat, are not the cowards
also the most pleased?” C. “Perhaps.” S. “Then rational people and
foolish people, brave men and cowards, are pleased, you say, nearly in
the same degree, or cowards more so than brave men.” C. “Yes.” S. “But
brave and rational people are good, foolish people and cowards are bad.”
C. “Yes.” S. “Then good people and bad people are pleased and vexed
alike.” C. “Yes.” S. “Are good people and bad people good and bad alike?
or bad people rather more good and bad than good people?” C. “I do not
understand you.” S. “Did you not say, that good people are good by the
presence of Good in them, and bad people by the Edition: current; Page:
[131] presence of Evil, and that Good is Pleasure, and Evil is Pain?” C.
“I did.” S. “Then a person who is pleased, has Good present in him,
since pleasure is Good.” C. “Certainly.” S. “Then he is a good man.” C.
“Yes.” S. “And a person who is vexed, has Evil present in him, since
pain is Evil.” C. “Yes.” S. “But men are bad men by the presence of Evil
in them. Do you not say so?” C. “I do.” S. “Then good men are those who
are pleased, and bad men are those who are vexed.” C. “Certainly.” S.
“Those are more good or bad, who are more pleased or vexed; those who
are less, less; those who are equally, equally.” C. “Yes.” S. “Did you
not say, that rational people and foolish people, brave people and
cowards, were pleased and vexed tolerably equally, or cowards even more
so than the brave?” C. “I did.” S. “See then what follows. The good man
is the rational and brave man, the bad man is the foolish man and the
coward. But the good man is also the man who is pleased, the bad man he
who is vexed. And the good and the bad man are pleased and vexed
equally, or the bad man rather more so than the good man. It follows
therefore, that the bad man is equally good and equally bad with the
good man, or rather more so. Is not this inevitable, if the Good and the
Pleasant are the same?”

“I have listened to you,” answered Callicles, “for a long time, and
admitted all that you said, being aware that if one concedes anything to
you even in jest, you eagerly seize hold of it like a raw youth. Do you
suppose that I, or any body else, do not think that some pleasures are
better, and others worse?” “You treat me,” replied Socrates, “like a
child, sometimes affirming one thing, sometimes a different thing, and
deceiving me. I did not think at first that you, who are my friend,
would deceive me intentionally. But now I suppose I must, according to
the old saying, make the best of what I can get. You say, then, that
some pleasures are good, and others evil.” C. “I do.”

S. “Are the good pleasures those which are beneficial, the bad ones
those which are hurtful?” C. “Yes.” S. “By beneficial, you mean those
which are causes of some good; by hurtful, those which are causes of
evil.” C. “I do.” S. “For instance, as to the bodily pleasures of eating
and drinking, if some of these produce in the body health or strength or
some other good bodily quality, these are good, but those which produce
the contraries of these effects are bad.” C. “Certainly.” S. “Among
pains, likewise, there are some good and others bad, in the same
manner.” C. “Undoubtedly.” S. “Then we ought to choose the good
pleasures and pains, and avoid the bad?” C. “Clearly.” S. “For it was
agreed between Polus and me, that Good was the end of all our actions;
and that all other things were done for the sake of Good, not Good for
the sake of other things. Do you agree in this?” C. “I do.” S. “Then the
pleasant ought to be done for the sake of Good, not Good for the sake of
the pleasant.” C. “Certainly.” S. “Now, are all of us capable Edition:
current; Page: [132] of distinguishing those pleasant things which are
good, from those which are bad, or is any art requisite for that
purpose?” C. “An art is requisite.” S. “Let us then call to mind what I
said to Polus and Gorgias. I said, that there are some pursuits which
have only pleasure in view, knowing nothing of good and evil, and others
which know what is good and what is evil: cookery (which is a skill, and
not an art) I placed in the first class; the art of medicine, in the
second. And do not think it allowable to sport with me, and to answer
whatever comes into your head, differently from what you think; nor, on
the other hand, consider me to be in sport. For we are on a subject
which even the most unthinking person would consider as the most serious
of all subjects, viz. In what manner we ought to live; whether in the
manner to which you exhort me, practising rhetoric, and occupying
ourselves with public affairs, or in the opposite manner of life,
according to philosophy; and in what respect this mode of life differs
from the other.

“It is perhaps best to go on as I began, and attempt to discriminate the
two modes of life from each other, and determine whether they are
different, and in what respect, and which of them should be adopted. You
do not, perhaps, yet know what I mean.” C. “I do not.” S. “I will be
more perspicuous. We have agreed, have we not, that Pleasant and Good
are not one thing but two things, and that there is a certain method for
the acquisition of each.” C. “We have.” S. “Now then tell me whether you
agree in what I said to our two friends. I said that cookery is only a
kind of skill, but that medicine is an art: because medicine has
considered the nature of the thing which it aims at producing, and the
causes of the operations which it enjoins, and can render an account of
them; but cookery has not considered the nature or the causes of
Pleasure, which is its sole end, but goes to work empirically and
unscientifically, a mere uncalculating routine, the mere memory of what
has often happened. Consider then, first, whether you think that this is
true, and that there are also with respect to the mind two methods
similar to these; one kind which are arts, and have some forethought of
what is best for the mind, another kind which disregard this, and
consider only the pleasures of the mind, and the means of producing
them, never considering or caring for the difference between a better
pleasure and a worse. This, whether it relates to the body, to the mind,
or to any thing else, I call adulation, provided it considers only
pleasure, without regarding good or evil. Do you concur in this?” C. “I
do not, but I will admit it, that your argument may be completed, and
that Gorgias may be gratified.” S. “Whether is this true of a single
mind only, and not true of two or more?” C. “It is true of two, or of
any number.” S. “Then it is possible to gratify a number of minds
collected together, without regarding their greatest Good.” C. “True.”
S. “What, then, are the pursuits which do this? First of all, let us
consider the art of playing the flute. Does it not seem to Edition:
current; Page: [133] you to pursue pleasure only, and to care for
nothing else?” C. “Yes.” S. “And that grave and magnificent art, tragic
poetry, what is its aim? Simply to gratify the spectators? Or, if any
things occur to it which are pleasant but bad, does it take care not to
say them; and if there be any thing disagreeable but useful, does it
make a point of saying or singing this to the spectators, whether they
are pleased with it or not?” C. “It is evident that it chiefly aims at
pleasure, and the gratification of the spectators.” S. “This, however,
we designated as adulation.” C. “We did.” S. “Now, then, if you take
away from poetry the rhythm and the metre and the music, is there any
thing remaining but discourse?” C. “Nothing.” S. “And this discourse is
addressed to the assembled people.” C. “It is.” S. “Then poetry is a
kind of oratory.” C. “So it seems.” S. “But rhetoric is oratory. Do not
poets appear to you to rhetorize, upon the stage?” C. “Yes.” S. “Now
then we have found out a kind of rhetoric, addressed to a popular
assembly, composed of men, women, and children, slaves and freemen,
which we do not much admire. We call it a kind of adulation.” C. “We
do.”

S. “What then shall we say of the rhetoric which is addressed to the
assembly of the Athenian people, or the people of any other state,
consisting of freemen only? Do the orators seem to you to have in view
constantly the greatest good; aiming solely at making the people as good
as possible by their discourses? Or do they, too, aim only at gratifying
the citizens, neglecting the public interest for the sake of their own
private concerns, and treating the people like children, attempting only
to gratify them, and not caring whether they are made better or worse by
the gratification?” C. “This is not a simple question. There are some
who address the people really caring for them; there are others such as
you describe.” S. “It is sufficient. If this thing be of two kinds, one
of them is adulation, and disgraceful, the other is laudable, contriving
always that the minds of the citizens may become as good as possible,
and always persisting in saying what is best, whether it be pleasing to
the hearers or not. But you do not know any instance of this kind of
rhetoric. Can you mention any orator who has acted in this manner?” C.
“I cannot mention any orator of the present day.” S. “Can you mention
any one of the ancient orators, by whose means the Athenians became
better than they were before he began to harangue them? I do not know of
any.” C. “What! have you never heard of Themistocles, and Cimon, and
Miltiades; and Pericles, whom you yourself have seen? all of whom were
good men.” S. “Yes, if Good consists in what you at first called it, the
satisfaction of our own desires and those of others: but if, as we
afterwards were forced to admit, there be some desires the satisfaction
of which makes us better, and others which make us worse, and that the
distinguishing of these from each other is an art; can you affirm that
any of the men you named, practised that art?” C. “I cannot tell.” S.
“But if you Edition: current; Page: [134] consider well, you will see.
It is not true, that a good man, who speaks with the greatest Good
always in view, will not speak at haphazard, but with reference to some
end? All other artists employ their various means, not picking them up
at hazard, but looking to the nature of the work which they have to
accomplish, and endeavouring that it may assume a certain shape. The
painter, the architect, the shipbuilder—each of these, places his
materials in a certain order, and contrives that one thing shall be fit
and suitable to another, until the whole is completed, a regulated and
ordered thing: Is it not so?” C. “It is.” S. “A house which has
regulation and order is a good house; a disordered house is a bad one.”
C. “Yes.” S. “And a ship?” C. “Yes.” S. “And our own bodies?” C. “Yes.”
S. “And our minds?” C. “This must be admitted from the preceding
admissions.” S. “What name do we give to that which arises in the body,
from order and regulation?” C. “You mean, health and strength.” S. “And
what is the name of that which arises in the mind, from order and
regulation?” C. “Why do not you yourself answer?” S. “If it pleases you,
I will. If you agree with me, say so, if not, refute me. I hold, that
the order of the body is termed healthiness, from whence health and all
other good qualities of the body proceed; and that the order and
regulation of the mind is termed lawfulness, by which men become orderly
and obedient to law: and this is as much as to say, justice and
self-restraint. Do you assent?” C. “Be it so.” S. “Then a good orator,
an orator according to art, in all which he says and all which he does
to those to whom he addresses himself, in all which he gives to them and
all which he takes away from them, will have constantly in view, in what
manner justice may be produced in their minds and injustice removed,
self-controul produced and self-indulgence removed, all virtue produced
and vice removed.” C. “Granted.” S. “For of what use is it to bestow
upon a sick and ill-ordered body abundant and agreeable food or drink,
which will do it no good, but often much harm?” C. “Be it so.” S. “For
it is not beneficial to man, to live with his body in a bad state; that
would be to live badly.” C. “Yes.” S. “Physicians, then, usually permit
a person to satisfy his desires, by eating as much as he pleases when he
is hungry and drinking when he is thirsty, so long as he is in health;
but when he is sick, they do not allow him to enjoy what he desires. Do
you grant this?” C. “I do.” S. “And is not the same thing equally true
of the mind? While it is in a bad state, while it is silly, and unjust,
and impious, and incapable of self-controul, it should be kept from what
it desires, and not permitted to do any thing except what will make it
better.” C. “Granted.” S. “For this is better for the mind.” C. “Yes.”
S. “But to keep it from what it desires, is to punish it?” C. “It is.”
S. “Then punishment is better for the mind than impunity.” C. “I do not
know what you are talking about. Ask some one else.” S. “This man cannot
bear to be benefited, by suffering the very thing we are talking about,
punishment.” C. “I do not care for what you say: I have answered you
only on Edition: current; Page: [135] Gorgias’s account.” S. “Well: what
shall we do? Shall we break off the argument in the middle?” C. “Judge
for yourself.” S. “But it is not lawful, they say, to leave even a story
half finished, without putting a head to it, that it may not go about
headless. I beg you therefore to continue answering, that our argument
may have a head put to it.” C. “How obstinate you are. If you will be
persuaded by me, you will drop this discussion, or discuss with somebody
else.” S. “Will anybody else, then, carry on the discussion?” C. “Cannot
you carry it on by yourself, either speaking continuously, or making
answer to yourself?” S. “It seems that there is nothing else to be done.
But we are all of us alike concerned in pushing the inquiry, what view
of this subject is the true one. I shall therefore state the matter
according to my own notions: but if any of you should think that I
concede to myself what is not correct, he ought to interrupt and refute
me. What I say, I do not say from knowledge; I am only inquiring, in
common with yourselves; and if my opponent appears to me to say any
thing just, I shall be the first to acknowledge it. If then you wish the
argument to proceed, I will continue it; if not, let us leave off, and
retire.”

Gorgias assured Socrates, both in his own name and in that of the
bystanders, that they were all anxious for the discussion to proceed. It
did proceed: but the conclusion, the most interesting part of the whole
dialogue, we must, though with regret, postpone to the next number.[*]

Callicles having, as we saw in the last number, declined to take any
further part in the argument, Socrates requested him, if he would not
join in the discussion, at least to listen and stop him if he said any
thing incorrect. “If you refute me,” continued Socrates, “I shall not be
angry with you, as you are with me, but shall account you my greatest
friend.” Socrates then recapitulated the preceding argument, questioning
and answering himself. That Pleasant and Good are not synonymous; that
the Pleasant is to be pursued for the sake of Good, not Good for the
sake of the pleasant: That the Pleasant is that, the presence of which
makes us pleased. Good, that, the presence of which makes us good. But
we, like all other things that are made good, are made so by the
presence of some kind of excellence; and our excellence, like that of
all other things, is not brought about by haphazard, but by order, and
regulation, and art. “That, therefore, which, when it exists in any
thing, makes it good, is some kind of order. An ordered mind,
consequently, is better than an unregulated one. But an ordered mind is
a considerate* one; a considerate mind therefore is good, and its
opposite, a mind which never resists any impulse, is bad. But a
considerate Edition: current; Page: [136] mind will always do what is
fitting, both towards gods and men; or it would not be considerate. But
a mind which does what is fitting towards men, is a just mind; towards
gods, a pious one. And courageous likewise: for a considerate person
will neither seek nor avoid what he ought not: he will seek, and avoid,
and endure, those things, those persons, those pleasures, and those
pains, which he ought. A considerate person, or what is the same thing,
a person possessed of self-command, is therefore, as we said before, of
necessity just, and brave, and pious. And a good man does all things
well, and is happy; a bad man does ill, and is miserable; and this is,
the man without self-restraint, whom you praised. If all this be true,
he who would be happy must practise self-restraint, and fly from
self-indulgence; he must endeavour above all things not to require
punishment, but if he, or his friends, or his country, be in need of
punishment, he must inflict it upon them. Such, it seems to me, is the
scope and end of a good life: to produce justice and self-control in him
who would be happy; not to let his desires be uncontrolled, and make it
the object of his life to satisfy them—an endless ill, the life of a
pirate: for such a person cannot be loved by God or man, for he cannot
be in any sympathy or communion (κοινωνία) with them.

“Either this argument, which proves that the happy are happy by the
possession of justice and self-control, the wretched wretched by the
possession of vice, must be refuted; or if this be true, we must
consider what are the conclusions from it. The conclusions are, all
those which you asked whether I was serious in asserting; that we ought
to accuse ourselves and our friends, and bring ourselves to justice, if
we commit any injury; and that this is the proper employment of
rhetoric. And what you thought that Polus admitted from shamefacedness,
was true, viz. that to injure is more ignoble, and consequently a
greater evil, than to be injured; and likewise what Polus said that
Gorgias admitted from shamefacedness, that he who would be rightly a
rhetorician, must be just, and must understand justice.

“This being the case, let us consider whether there was any ground for
your reproof of me, when you said that I am not able to protect myself
or any of my friends from the greatest dangers; but that, like those who
have been deprived of their civil rights by the sentence of a court of
justice, I am at the mercy of any one who chooses, as you expressed it,
to strike me a blow, or to take away my property, or to banish me from
the state, or even to kill me: and that to be thus situated is, of all
things, as you said, the most ignoble. But I have said often, and there
is no reason against saying it again, that the most ignoble of all
things is not to be struck unjustly, or to be robbed or put to death
unjustly. To do all these things unjustly, or to injure me in any way
whatever, is both a more ignoble and a worse thing to the person who
injures, than to me who am injured. This has been established by
arguments strong as iron and adamant; which, unless you or some Edition:
current; Page: [137] stouter man can refute, it is impossible to speak
reasonably, speaking otherwise than I do. For I always say the same
thing, viz. that I do not myself know how these things are; that,
however, no one, speaking in opposition to what has occurred to me on
this subject, is able to avoid absurdity. I therefore lay down these
things as true.

“If however they be true; if injustice be the greatest of evils to the
unjust man, but impunity in injustice a still greater evil if possible;
what kind of protection is it, which, to be unable to render to one’s
self or one’s friends, is really contemptible? Is it not that which
averts the greatest evil? Is not the nobleness of being able to protect,
and the ignobleness of being unable, proportional to the greatness of
the evil to be averted?” “Certainly,” replied Callicles. S. “Here then
are two evils: to injure, and to be injured: the first a greater evil,
the latter a less. What ought we to provide ourselves with, if we mean
to protect ourselves against these two evils? Power, or merely will? For
example, to escape from being injured, is it sufficient that we should
will not to be injured, or is power required for that purpose?” C. “It
is evident that power is required.” S. “And to injure:—Is it sufficient
to prevent us from doing injustice, that we should will not to do it, or
is it necessary for this purpose also, to have provided ourselves with a
power, with an art, which if we do not learn, and exercise, we shall do
injustice? Did you think that Polus and I were right when we agreed that
no one commits injustice willingly, but always unwillingly?” C. “Be it
so, that you may complete your argument.” S. “An art, and a power,
therefore, are required, in order not to do injustice.” C. “Yes.” S.
“What, now, are the means by which a person may contrive that he should
be never injured, or as little as possible? To me, it seems that it
would be requisite for him either to be a despotic ruler in the state,
or to associate himself with the existing government.” “Do you see,”
asked Callicles, “how ready I am to praise you if you say any thing
good? What you now say appears to me extremely well said.” S. “Consider
whether you approve also of what I shall say next. It seems to me, that,
as the old sages used to say, each man loves most those who most
resemble himself. Do not you think so?” C. “I do.” S. “Then, wherever
the government is in the hands of a savage and uncultured despot, if
there be any person in the state who is much better than he, the despot
will be afraid of him, and will never be able to love him with all his
heart.” C. “Agreed.” S. “Neither would he love any one who is much worse
than himself; for he would despise him.” C. “This likewise is true.” S.
“No one therefore remains to be his friend, except such as, being of a
similar disposition to him, praising and blaming the same things which
he does, are willing to be his subjects and be governed by him. Any
person of this sort will be extremely powerful in the state, and no one
will injure him without being the worse for it.” C. “Yes.” S. “If then,
in the state in question, any Edition: current; Page: [138] young man
would contrive by what means he may become very powerful, and no one may
injure him, his best plan is, to accustom himself from his youth upwards
to have the same pleasures and pains with his master, and to resemble
him as much as possible.” C. “Yes.” S. “By this method he will have
attained the one object, of not being injured.” C. “He will.” S. “But
will he have attained the other object, not to injure? or the very
opposite? having made himself to resemble the ruler, who is unjust, and
having attained influence with him? It seems to me that he will have
accomplished, on the contrary, the means of doing the greatest possible
quantity of injustice, and escaping with impunity.” C. “So it seems.” S.
“Then he will be afflicted with the greatest of evils, being evil in
mind, and being corrupted by power, and by the imitation of his master.”
C. “I do not know how you twist and turn the argument backwards and
forwards. Do you not know that this imitator will, if he pleases, be
able to destroy the nonimitator, and take his property?” S. “Surely I
do, most excellent Callicles, if I am not deaf, having heard it so often
from you and Polus, and from nearly every other person in the town. But
do you also listen to me, who say that it is true he will kill him if he
pleases, but if so, a bad man will kill a good one.” C. “And is not this
the very thing which is to be complained of?” S. “Not by any rational
person, as the argument has shown. Do you think that a person should
make it the object of all his exertions, to live as long as he can, and
to study all the arts which can preserve us from dangers, such, for
instance, as that rhetoric which you advised me to study, which saves
our lives and fortunes in a court of justice?” C. “And very good advice
it was.” S. “Pray, does the faculty of swimming appear to you a very
grave and dignified one?” C. “No, indeed.” S. “And yet it saves men’s
lives, when they are in circumstances in which that faculty is needed.
If this should appear to you a trifling instance, I will give you a
greater one, the art of navigation; which not only saves our lives but
our property from the greatest of dangers, like rhetoric. And yet this
art is unassuming and modest, and does not take honour to itself as
having effected something splendid, but if it has brought you safe from
Ægina hither, it charges two oboli, and if from the distance of Pontus
or Egypt, having saved youself, your wife, your children, your fortune,
it lands you here and charges two drachmæ; and the man whose art has
accomplished all this, goes down to the beach, and walks about his ship
with a humble dress and demeanour. For he is aware, I take it, that it
is impossible to tell whom among his passengers he has benefited and
whom he has harmed by not suffering them to be drowned, knowing that he
has landed them no better men than he took them on board, either in body
or mind. He considers that if any one, being afflicted with great and
incurable bodily diseases, has been saved from shipwreck, he is
unfortunate in not having perished, as from having received any benefit:
and if any one has Edition: current; Page: [139] many incurable diseases
in what is of greater price than the body, his mind, it is no benefit to
this man to be saved from death, whether by sea or by the executioner;
since it is not good for the bad man to live, for he must live badly.
Therefore a pilot is not held in reverence, though he saves our lives.
Nor an engineer either, who is sometimes as potent a preserver as either
a pilot or a general; for he occasionally saves whole cities. Do you
think as highly of him as you do of a rhetorician? And yet, if he were
to exalt his profession after your fashion, and call upon all men to
become engineers, on account of the exalted excellence of the art, he
would have enough to say. But you, in spite of all this, despise him and
his art, and would call him an engineer as a term of disdain, and would
not give your daughter to his son, or allow your son to marry his
daughter. And yet, by your own account of yourself, what ground have you
for looking down upon the engineer, and the other people whom I have
mentioned? I know you would say, you are better, and of a better sort.
But if to be better does not consist in what I said; if all excellence
consists in being able to preserve ourselves and what belongs to us, no
matter what sort of men we are; then your disdain of the engineer and
the physician, and of the other arts which have our preservation in
view, is ridiculous. But observe whether nobleness and goodness do not
consist in something quite different from saving and being saved: for a
true man should not make it his study to live as long as possible, but
should commit this to God, and believing what the women say, that no man
can escape his destiny, should consider in what manner, so long as he
does live, he may live best. Should he assimilate himself to the
government under which he lives? and should you now study to resemble
the Athenian people, that you may be a favourite with them, and may be
powerful in the state? Let us consider well, lest we should purchase
this power at the expense of what we most value. For if you think that
any one can teach you an art which will make you powerful in this state,
being dissimilar to the government of it, whether for better or worse,
you are mistaken. You must be, not even an imitator of it, but actually
similar to it in your own nature, if you would have any success in
courting the favour of the Athenian people. Whoever, therefore, shall
make you most like to the Athenian people, will make you such a
politician and rhetorician, as you desire to become: for every person is
pleased with discourse conformable to his own disposition, and
displeased with that which is unconformable to it. Can you say any thing
against this?” C. “You seem to me, I do not know why, to speak well: but
I am like most people, I am not much persuaded by you.” S. “The passion
for the people, with which your soul is filled, resists me. But if we
consider the subject better, and frequently, you will perhaps be
persuaded.

“Remember, now, that we said there were two methods of ministering
either to the body or the mind; the one having in view Pleasure, the
other Edition: current; Page: [140] aiming at the greatest Good, whether
producing pleasure or pain.” C. “We did.” S. “That which aims at
pleasure, is ignoble, and no better than adulation.” C. “Let it be so if
you please.” S. “The other aims at what is best for that which it
serves, be it the body or the mind.” C. “Yes.” S. “Ought we not then to
attach ourselves to the service of our country and our countrymen, with
a view to make them as good as we can? For without this, as we have
found before, it is of no use to render them any other benefit, since if
their minds are not well ordered, it does them no good to obtain either
wealth or authority or any other power. Is it not so?” C. “If you will.”

S. “If then we were exhorting one another to apply ourselves to the
public works, the building of walls, or temples, or docks, ought we not
to examine ourselves, and see, in the first place, whether we understand
the art of architecture or not, and under what master we have studied
it?” C. “Certainly.” S. “And next, whether we have ever constructed any
private edifice, for ourselves or any of our friends, and whether it be
a good or a bad one. For if, examining ourselves, we found that we had
studied under good and celebrated teachers, and had erected many
admirable edifices, first under our masters, and afterwards by ourselves
when we had left our masters, we should then act like reasonable beings
in undertaking the public works. But if we could not name any person who
had been our teacher, nor point to any buildings which we had erected,
or to any that were not worthless, it would be senseless in us to take
upon ourselves the construction of any public work, and to exhort each
other to do so. Is this rightly said or not?” C. “It is.” S. “And so
likewise if we were about to practise as physicians, or were inviting
one another to do so, you and I ought to consider of one another thus:
Pray how is Socrates himself in respect to health? Has any one been ever
cured of an illness through his means? And I should ask the same
questions respecting you. And if we could not discover that any one,
foreigner or citizen, man or woman, had been brought into a better state
of body by our means, would it not be ridiculous in us to attempt, as
the proverb says, to learn pottery in the pot itself, and endeavour to
practise for the public before we had tried in private, failed often and
succeeded often, until we have sufficiently exercised ourselves in the
art?” C. “It would.” S. “Now, then, since you have recently begun to
transact the affairs of the state, and are calling upon me and
reproaching me because I do not follow your example, let us examine one
another: Pray has Callicles ever made any of the citizens a better man?
Is there any person, foreigner or citizen, slave or freeman, who, having
been previously unjust and intemperate and thoughtless, has been made a
good man by Callicles? If any one were to ask you this question, what
would you say? Do you not like to answer whether you have accomplished
any achievement of this sort while yet in a private station, before you
Edition: current; Page: [141] attempted to practise publicly?” C. “You
are reproachful.” S. “I do not ask the question from any wish to
reproach you, but from a real wish to know in what way you think that
men ought to conduct themselves in public life, and whether you, in your
public conduct, will be intent upon anything else, than that we, the
citizens, may be as good as possible. Have we not frequently agreed that
this is what a politician should do? Have we agreed or not? Answer. We
have agreed: I will answer for you.

“If, then, this be what a good man should do for his country, pray look
back and tell me, whether Pericles and Cimon, and Miltiades and
Themistocles, still appear to you to have been good citizens.” C. “They
do.” S. “Then, if they were so, each of them must have made his
countrymen better than they were before. Did they, or not?” C. “They
did.” S. “Then, when Pericles began to speak in the public assemblies,
the Athenians were worse men than they were when he last addressed
them?” C. “Perhaps so.” S. “Not perhaps, but they positively must, if he
was a good citizen; by our former admissions.” C. “What then?” S.
“Nothing: but tell me this, whether the Athenians are said to have been
made better by Pericles, or, on the contrary, to have been corrupted by
him. For I hear it said that Pericles made the Athenians idlers and
cowards, and gossips and covetous, being the first who accustomed them
to receive pay.”* C. “Those who told you so are Spartans at heart.” S.
“One thing, however, I was not told, but we both of us know it; that
Pericles was in high reputation, and never was condemned on any
disgraceful charge by the Athenians, at first, when they were
comparatively bad men; but after he had made them virtuous men, towards
the end of his life, they found him guilty of peculation, and were near
passing sentence of death upon him.” C. “What then? Does this prove
Pericles a bad statesman?” S. “A superintendent of asses, at least, or
of horses or oxen, would be thought a very bad one, if the animals did
not kick, and start, and bite, when they were intrusted to him, but did
all this when they quitted his charge. Is not that person, in your
opinion, a bad guardian of any animal, who sends him forth more savage
than he received him?” C. “I will say yes, to please you.” S. “Will you
also please me by answering whether man is an animal or not?” C.
“Unquestionably.” S. “And Pericles was a superintendent of men.” C.
“Yes.” S. “Ought they not then, if he, their superintendent, had been a
good politician, to have become more just, not more unjust, under his
care?” C. “Yes.” S. “But the just, as Homer says, are gentle. What say
you?” C. “The same.” S. “Now, he left them more ferocious than he
received them, and that too towards himself, towards whom he least
desired it.” C. “Do you wish me to agree with you?” S. “If you think I
speak the truth.” C. “Be it so, then.” S. “And if Edition: current;
Page: [142] more ferocious, then more unjust, and worse.” C. “Be it so.”
S. “Then Pericles was not a good statesman.” C. “So say you.” S. “And
you too, from your own admission. And what of Cimon? Did not those whom
he served banish him by ostracism, that for ten years they might not
hear his voice? And did they not banish Themistocles, and sentence
Miltiades to a dungeon? If these had been good statesmen, they would not
have been so treated. A good coachman does not at first keep his seat,
but after he has trained his horses, and learned to be a better driver,
then fall off. This does not happen either in driving or in any thing
else: does it, think you?” C. “No.” S. “Then we were right in saying
that we knew of no man who had been a good statesman in this nation. You
allowed that there was none in our own day, but affirmed that there were
such persons formerly, and instanced these men. But these, it appears,
are on a level with those of the present day; so that, if they were
rhetoricians, they neither possessed the true rhetoric, nor even that
which is a kind of adulation, otherwise they would not have been so
unsuccessful.” “But,” said Callicles, “no one in the present day has
approached to these men in the works which they accomplished.” “Neither
do I disparage them,” replied Socrates, “in the character of
ministrators to the people’s inclinations; I think that they were much
more skilful ministrators than the men of our day, and more capable of
providing for the nation what it desired. But in respect of changing its
desires, and not giving way to them, but exhorting and impelling the
nation to those courses by which the citizens might become better men,
they did not differ from our own contemporaries: and this alone is the
business of a good citizen. In providing ships, and walls, and docks,
and so forth, I grant that these men were abler than ours.

“You and I are acting very ridiculously. All this time we continually
return to the same point, and never know each other’s meaning. I think
you have often admitted that there are two kinds of pursuits relating to
the body and the mind, one of them merely ministrative, which can
provide food for our bodies if they are hungry, drink if they are
thirsty, clothes if they are cold, and in short whatever the body
desires. I purposely repeat the same illustrations constantly, that you
may the more easily understand me. It is no wonder that any one who is
capable of providing these things, whether he be a dealer or a producer,
a cook, or weaver, and so forth, should think himself and be thought by
others to be the proper guardian of the body; so long as they do not
know that there is, besides all this, an art of gymnastics and medicine,
which is the real guardian of the body; and which it is fit should
govern all these other arts, and make use of them as instruments,
because this art knows what food or drink is good and bad, with
reference to the excellence of the body, but the others do not know; for
which reason these are all slavish and illiberal, and simply
ministerial, and gymnastics Edition: current; Page: [143] and medicine
ought in justice to be sovereign over them. You sometimes appear to
know, that I assert this to be true likewise of the mind, and you
assent, as if you understood my meaning: but you presently turn back,
and say that there have been excellent citizens in this state, and when
I ask who, you name to me exactly such a kind of politicians, as if,
when I asked you what good gymnasts and superintendents of the body
there are or have been, you were gravely to answer, Thearion the baker,
and Mithæcus the author of the cookery book, and Sarambus the tavern
keeper, saying that these were surprisingly good in the care and
treatment of the body, by providing excellent bread, and meat, and wine.
You would perhaps be angry, if I were to answer, My friend, you know
nothing of gymnastics; you tell me of people who can only minister to me
and supply my desires, having no sound knowledge respecting them: and
who perhaps, after swelling and fattening men’s bodies, and being
praised by them, will end by destroying even their original flesh. They,
indeed, from inexperience, will not perhaps lay upon these men who
crammed them, the blame of their diseases and loss of flesh; but when
their former repletion, not being of a healthy kind, shall long after
produce diseases, they will reproach and punish those who happen to be
attending on them and advising them at that time, but will eulogize the
original authors of their ills. You, Callicles, now do precisely the
same thing. You eulogize the men who, having feasted the Athenians and
crammed them with what they desire, are said to have made them a great
nation, because it is not perceived that the commonwealth is tumid and
hollow, through those men of antiquity: for, without making us just or
temperate, they have crammed us with ports, and docks, and
fortifications, and revenues, and such trumpery. When the crisis
arrives, the Athenians will lay the blame upon their then advisers; they
will eulogize Themistocles, and Cimon, and Pericles, the authors of
their calamity; but when they have lost their original possessions as
well as those more recently acquired, perhaps they will revenge
themselves upon you, if you do not take care, and upon my friend
Alcibiades, who were not the original authors of their evils, although
perhaps you may have assisted in producing them.

“And by the way, I observe that something which is very usual, is very
unreasonable. When the state takes hold of any of its statesmen, and
treats them as criminals, they are indignant, and represent themselves
as ill used men, who having rendered many great services to the state,
are unjustly destroyed by it. This is all imposture. A leading man in a
state cannot be unjustly destroyed by the state of which he is the
leader. Those who call themselves politicians, resemble those who call
themselves sophists. The sophists, in other respects wise men, do one
thing which is very absurd: Calling themselves teachers of virtue, they
often reproach their disciples Edition: current; Page: [144] for
wronging them by not paying their hire, and not showing them gratitude
for the good they have done them. What can be more senseless than this,
that men who have become virtuous and just, men who have been purified
from injustice by their teacher, and imbued with justice, should be
unjust? Do you not think this absurd? You have forced me really to
harangue, Callicles, not being willing to answer.” C. “Cannot you speak,
unless some one will answer you?” S. “It seems I can; for I have been
speaking for a long time, since you will not answer. But tell me, in the
name of friendship: Do you not think it very absurd, that he who says he
has made some one a good man, should blame him, that having been made by
him, and still being, a good man, he is nevertheless a bad one?” C. “I
think so.” S. “And do you not hear those who profess to instruct men in
virtue, speaking in this manner?” C. “I do. But why do you talk about
men who are good for nothing?”* S. “And what will you say of those, who,
professing to have been at the head of the nation, and to have managed
it so that it should become as good as possible, afterwards turn round
and reproach it as being wicked? Do you think that such persons are any
better than those whom you despise? A sophist, and a rhetorician, are
the same thing, or very much alike, as I said to Polus. But you, from
ignorance, think the one a fine thing, and despise the other. In
reality, the pursuit of the sophist is nobler than that of the
rhetorician, as the art of Legislation is nobler than the art of
Judicature, and Gymnastics than Medicine. I, for my part, thought that
orators and sophists were the only persons who were not entitled to
accuse their scholars of behaving ill to them; for in the same breath
they would be accusing themselves of having done no good to those whom
they undertook to improve. Is it not so?” C. “It is.” S. “And they alone
should have it in their power to bestow their particular kind of service
without pay. A person who has received any other service, who has, for
instance, acquired swiftness by the instructions of a gymnast, might
perhaps be ungrateful to the gymnast, unless he previously made a
contract with him for the payment of hire. For men are not unjust by
slowness, but by injustice.” C. “Yes.” S. “Then if any one frees them
from this quality of injustice, there is no danger of their being unjust
to him. If he can really make men good, he alone may with safety cast
this benefit at random.” C. “He may.” S. “Therefore, it is no disgrace
to take money for giving advice on any other subject, as on building,
for example.” C. “No.” S. “But on this subject, how one may become most
virtuous, and may best administer one’s family or Edition: current;
Page: [145] the state, it is considered disgraceful to say that we will
not give advice unless we are paid for it.” C. “Yes.” S. “And why?
Because of all services, this is the only one which of itself inspires
the person benefited with a desire to repay the obligation: so that it
is a sign of having performed this service well, if we are requited for
it, ill, if we are not. Is not this true?” C. “It is.”

S. “To which, then, of these kinds of service do you exhort me? As a
physician, to strive that the Athenians may become as good as possible?
Or as a mere ministrative officer, to wait upon their desires? Speak out
boldly.” C. “I say, then, as a ministrative officer.” S. “You call upon
me, then, to become an adulator.” C. “Had you rather be called a
Mysian?* as you certainly will, if you do not follow this advice.” S.
“Do not say, as you have said so often, that any one who pleases may put
me to death; least I should answer, that if so, a bad man will put to
death a good one. Nor that he will deprive me of my substance; lest I
should reply, that if he does, he will not be able to use it for his
good; but, as he acquired it unjustly, so he will use it unjustly; if
unjustly, ignobly; and if ignobly, perniciously to himself.” C. “How
confident you seem to be that you are in no danger of these things! as
if you could not be brought into danger of your life, even perhaps by a
worthless fellow.” S. “I must be very foolish, if I did not know that in
this state any one whatever may be so treated. This, however, I well
know, that if I should, as you say, be charged with a criminal offence,
it will be a bad man who charges me; for no good man would indict a man
who does no wrong. And it will be no wonder if I should be put to death.
Shall I tell you why I think so?” C. “If you please.” S. “I think that
I, with a very few other Athenians, (not to say I alone,) cultivate the
true art of politics, and that I alone, among the men of the present
day, am a politician in the true sense of the word. Since then I say
whatever I do say, not for the gratification of any one, but aiming at
what is best, not at what is most agreeable, and not choosing to do
those fine things which you recommend, I shall not know what to say in a
court of justice. What I said to Polus, would apply to myself. I shall
be judged as a physician would, if tried before children, on the
accusation of a cook. What could such a person say in his defence?
Suppose his accuser to say, See what evils this man has inflicted upon
you, cutting and burning and emaciating you, giving you bitter draughts,
and forcing you to fast; not like me, who have feasted you with every
thing that is delightful. What could the physician say to all this? If
he said the truth, ‘I did all these things for your health,’ do you not
think that such judges would hoot him down?” C. “Probably.” S. “And I
myself, I well Edition: current; Page: [146] know, should be treated in
a similar manner, if I were brought before a court of justice. For I
shall not be able to remind the judges of any pleasures that I have
procured for them, which are what they understand by benefits. But I do
not envy either the providers or those for whom they provide. And if any
one should say that I corrupt the youth by unsettling their minds, or
libel the older men by bitter speeches, either in private or in public,
I shall neither be able to say the truth, viz. ‘I say and do all these
things justly, and therefore for your good,’ nor shall I have any other
defence; so that I must be content to undergo my fate.” C. “Does a man,
then, who is thus situated, so unable to protect himself, appear to you
to be as he should be?” S. “If that be in him, of which we have so often
spoken: if he have protected himself, by never having said or done
anything unjust, either towards men or gods. For this is, as we have
frequently admitted, the best sort of self-protection. If, therefore,
any one should convict me of being incapable of affording this
protection to myself or others, I should be ashamed, whether I were
convicted in the presence of many, or of one only; and if I were to
perish from this kind of incapability, I should be grieved; but if I
should die for want of Adulatory Rhetoric, I should bear my death very
easily. Death itself no one fears, who is not altogether irrational and
unmanly; but to commit injustice is an object of rational fear, for to
arrive in the other world with the soul loaded with crimes, is the
greatest of evils. I will, if you please, set forth to you in what
manner this happens. I will relate to you a history, which you will, as
I think, consider a fable, but I shall state it to you as true.”

Socrates then introduces a mythos or legend, of the description so
frequent in Plato, and which he never seems to deliver as truth, but as
a symbol of some truth. This mythos relates to a future state, and a
general judgment of mankind. Formerly (he says) men were judged on the
day on which they were destined to die, and were tried by living judges:
but Pluto and the guardians of Elysium complained to Jupiter, that
people frequently were sent to them who were undeserving; for, being
tried while yet alive, they were tried with their mortal garments not
stripped off; and many whose souls were evil, had dressed them out in a
handsome body, and rank and wealth, and when the trial came on, they
produced many witnesses, to assert that they had led a just life: and
the judges were imposed upon by these means, more especially as they
also were still alive, and gross material organs obstructed the
clearness of their mental sight. On this account it was ordered that men
should no longer foresee their own death; and that they should be tried
naked, that is, not till they were dead, and by judges who were likewise
dead and naked. Æacus, Rhadamanthus, and Minos, therefore, judge
mankind, at the place where the two roads to Edition: current; Page:
[147] Tartarus and to Elysium separate. “Death,” added Socrates, “is
merely the separation of the body and the soul: each of them remains the
same in its own nature. The body, for some time at least, continues of
the same figure and aspect, and with the same marks upon it, as during
life; and the soul likewise, when stripped of the body, discloses its
natural state, as well as all the artificial impressions which have been
made upon it by the habits acquired during life. These judges,
therefore, when the souls come to them, know not whose souls they are,
but often take hold of the soul of the Great King,* or any other
monarch, or powerful man, and finding nothing sound in it, but seeing it
branded and imprinted with the stigmas of perjury and injustice, which
the practices of the man during his life have left upon it, and finding
it crooked and awry from having been nurtured in falsehood and
deception, and full of baseness and disorderliness from habits of luxury
and insolence and self-indulgence, they dismiss it to the place of
torment. All punishment, when properly inflicted, is designed either to
benefit the sufferer by making him better, or to be a warning to others,
and render them better by the terror of the example. Those whose vices
are curable, are benefited by their torments; such benefits can only
arise from suffering, either here or in Tartarus; for there are no other
means of being cured of injustice. But those whose crimes are of the
deepest dye, and who are consequently incurable, are made examples of,
and are not benefited by their punishment, being incurable, but serve to
benefit the beholders, being hung up as an example to those vicious men
who come there. Of these Archelaus will be one, if Polus has told truth
respecting him. I apprehend that most of these examples are yielded by
despots and powerful statesmen; for they, from the greater license which
they possess, commit the greatest crimes. Homer bears witness to this,
for he has represented those who suffer eternally in hell as all of them
kings, Tantalus, and Sysiphus, and Tityus:[*] he has not placed
Thersites, or any other wicked private individual, among those who
suffer the great punishments, as being incurable; for it was not in the
power of these men to commit the greater crimes: by so much the happier
they. It is not, however, absolutely impossible even for statesmen and
powerful men, to be virtuous; and they who are so, are highly to be
extolled: for it is difficult to live justly with much liberty of
committing injustice, and few are they who do so. There have been such
men, however, and probably there will be again, both here and elsewhere,
whose greatness consists in performing justly that which is intrusted to
them: and one very notable instance throughout all Greece, was
Aristides. Edition: current; Page: [148] When, on the contrary, the
judges behold a soul which has lived in holiness and truth, (usually, as
I affirm, that of a philosopher, who has minded his own affairs, and not
taken much part in active life,) they commend him, and dismiss him to
Elysium.

“I, therefore, make it my study so to act, that I shall appear before my
judge with my soul in the soundest possible state. Letting alone the
honours which the Many confer, and pursuing the Truth, I endeavour to
live well, and when the time shall come, to die well. And to the best of
my ability I call upon all men to do the same; and I exhort you, in my
turn, to this mode of life, and this struggle, which is worth all the
struggles here: and I tell you, that you will not be able to protect
yourself, but when Æacus calls you before him, you will gape and stare
as much as I should here, and perhaps some one will strike you a blow,
and insult you with every kind of contumely.

“Perhaps you may despise all this, and think it an old woman’s tale. And
there would be nothing wonderful in despising it, if, by seeking, we
could find any thing better and more true. But now you see that you, the
three wisest men now living in Greece, you, and Polus, and Gorgias, are
not able to show that any other course of life should be pursued, than
that which this story pronounces to be for our interest in a future
state; but amid so many refutations, this conclusion alone rests
undisturbed, that to injure should be more guarded against than to be
injured, and that it ought to be our greatest study not to appear good,
but to be good, both in private and in public; and that if in any
respect we become wicked, we should be punished, and that the next best
thing to being just, is to become so by being punished; and that all
adulation, whether of ourselves or of others, of a few or of many,
should be avoided, and rhetoric, and every thing else, should be
employed for the purposes of justice only. Be advised by me, therefore,
and follow me thither, where, if you arrive, you will be happy both in
life and after death. And suffer any man to despise you as a fool, and
to insult you if he will, aye, and to strike you even that disgraceful
blow: for you will suffer nothing by it if you are really excellent, and
practise virtue. And having thus practised it in common, we will then,
if we see fit, apply ourselves to public life, or adopt any course to
which our deliberations may lead us, being then fitter for deliberation
than we are now. For it is shameful, being as it seems we are, to value
ourselves as being somebody; we who never think the same thing on the
same subject, and that the greatest of all subjects; so ignorant are we.
Let us use, therefore, as our guide, the argument which we have now
investigated; which tells us, that the best mode of life, is to live and
die in the practice of Edition: current; Page: [149] justice, and of all
other virtue. This road let us follow, and to this let us exhort all
others; not that to which you exhorted me; for it is good for nothing, O
Callicles.”

The reader has now seen the substance of what the greatest moralist of
antiquity finds to say in recommendation of a virtuous life. His
arguments, like those of moralists in general, are not of a nature to
convince many, except those who do not need conviction; there are few of
them which Polus and Callicles, had the author endowed them with
dialectical skill equal to his own, might not easily have parried. But
is not this an inconvenience necessarily attending the attempt to prove
the eligibility of virtue by argument? Argument may show what general
regulation of the desires, or what particular course of conduct, virtue
requires: How to live virtuously, is a question the solution of which
belongs to the understanding: but the understanding has no inducements
which it can bring to the aid of one who has not yet determined whether
he will endeavour to live virtuously or no. It is impossible, by any
arguments, to prove that a life of obedience to duty is preferable, so
far as respects the agent himself, to a life of circumspect and cautious
selfishness. It will be answered, perhaps, that virtue is the road to
happiness, and that “honesty is the best policy.” Of this celebrated
maxim, may we not venture to say, once for all, without hesitation or
reserve, that it is not true? The whole experience of mankind runs
counter to it. The life of a good man or woman is full of unpraised and
unrequited sacrifices. In the present dialogue, which, though scanty in
conclusive arguments, is rich in profound reflections, there is one
remark of which the truth is quite universal—that the world loves its
like, and refuses its favour to its unlike. To be more honest than the
many, is nearly as prejudicial, in a worldly sense, as to be a greater
rogue. They, indeed, who have no conception of any higher honesty than
is practised by the majority of the society in which they live, are
right in considering such honesty as accordant with policy. But how is
he indemnified, who scruples to do that which his neighbours do without
scruple? Where is the reward, in any worldly sense, for heroism?
Civilization, with its laissez-aller and its laissez-faire which it
calls tolerance, has, in two thousand years, done thus much for the
moral hero, that he now runs little risk of drinking hemlock like
Socrates, or like Christ, of dying on the cross. The worst that can well
happen to him is to be everywhere ill spoken of, and to fail in all his
worldly concerns: and if he be unusually fortunate, he may, perhaps, be
so well treated by the rest of mankind, as to be allowed to be honest in
peace.

The old monk in Rabelais had a far truer notion of worldly wisdom: “To
perform your appointed task indifferently well; never to speak ill of
your Edition: current; Page: [150] superiors; and to let the mad world
go its own way, for it will go its own way.”*

All valid arguments in favour of virtue, presuppose that we already
desire virtue, or desire some of its ends and objects. You may prove to
us that virtue tends to the happiness of mankind, or of our country; but
that supposes that we already care for mankind or for our country. You
may tell us that virtue will gain us the approbation of the wise and
good; but this supposes that the wise and good are already more to us
than other people are. Those only will go along with Socrates in the
preceding dialogue, who already feel that the accordance of their lives
and inclinations with some scheme of duty is necessary to their comfort;
whose feelings of virtue are already so strong, that if they allow any
other consideration to prevail over those feelings, they are really
conscious that the health of their souls is gone, and that they are, as
Plato affirms, in a state of disease. But no arguments which Plato urges
have power to make those love or desire virtue, who do not already: nor
is this ever to be effected through the intellect, but through the
imagination and the affections.

The love of virtue, and every other noble feeling, is not communicated
by reasoning, but caught by inspiration or sympathy from those who
already have it; and its nurse and foster-mother is Admiration. We
acquire it from those whom we love and reverence, especially from those
whom we earliest love and reverence; from our ideal of those, whether in
past or in present times, whose lives and characters have been the
mirror of all noble qualities; and lastly, from those who, as poets or
artists, can clothe those feelings in the most beautiful forms, and
breathe them into us through our imagination and our sensations. It is
thus that Plato has deserved the title of a great moral writer. Christ
did not argue about virtue, but commanded it: Plato, when he argues
about it, argues for the most part inconclusively; but he resembles
Christ in the love which he inspires for it, and in the stern resolution
never to swerve from it, which those who can relish his writings
naturally feel when perusing them. And the present writer regrets that
his imperfect abstract is so ill fitted to convey any idea of the degree
in which this dialogue makes the feelings and course of life which it
inculcates commend themselves to our inmost nature, by associating them
with our most impressive conceptions of beauty and power.

Edition: current; Page: [151]


The Apology of Socrates

[Monthly Repository, IX (Feb., and March, 1835), 112-21, and 169-78. Not
republished; signed “A.” at 152.16, the end of the introductory
paragraphs, rather than at the end of the article, presumably to mark
what follows as a full translation, instead of an abstract, as are the
other dialogues in the Monthly Repository. Identified in JSM’s
bibliography (after the general heading cited on 38) as “No IV. The
Apology of Socrates: part 1 in the M.R. for Febry 1835 / part 2 in the
M.R. for March, 1835” (MacMinn, 37). There are no marks in the
Somerville College copy.

For comments on this and the other translations, see the Introduction
and the Textual Introduction, xvii-xxviii and lxxx-lxxxiii above.]

we have given several specimens of the philosophy of Socrates, as
exhibited, and doubtless improved, by Plato, in those of his works which
there is no reason to consider as having any foundation in real
incidents, or conversations actually held between the supposed
interlocutors. It will now be interesting to the reader to be introduced
to Socrates as described by himself, in the work which stands among
Plato’s writings under the title of The Apology of Socrates, and in the
form of a speech delivered before his judges, on the celebrated trial
for blasphemy, which terminated in his capital condemnation. It has been
a question among the critics, whether this speech is the work of
Socrates himself, or of Plato under his master’s name. But the
discerning Schleiermacher, and a scholar and critic not unworthy to be
named even with Schleiermacher, the Rev. Connop Thirlwall, have adduced
reasons which, in our judgment, leave little doubt that a speech,
substantially identical with that which is now about to engage our
attention, was actually delivered by Socrates at his trial; and that
Plato, in this case, aimed only at being a faithful reporter of what his
master had thought fit to say in his own vindication, when prosecuted
for his life on the accusation of corrupting the youth, and of being an
unbeliever in the gods of his country.*

Edition: current; Page: [152]
An abstract, such as those we gave of the three dialogues which have
successively occupied our attention,[*] would entirely fail to give any
conception of this singular performance: and after some consideration,
we have resolved upon attempting an exact translation. It would,
however, require a Plato, so to translate Plato as to render the ideas
intelligible to an English reader, in the exact shape in which they were
presented by an Athenian speaker to an Athenian audience, preserving, at
the same time, all the energy and beauty of the style. We have been
obliged to confine ourselves to one or the other object: either to put
something like the matter of this discourse into the best English we
could command, sacrificing all that is characteristic of the manner of
Socrates, and of the notions and feelings of the Athenian public; or
else, to retain the very thoughts of Socrates, and his very mode of
stating and illustrating those thoughts, but to exchange Plato’s
eloquent Greek for an English style at once bald and verbose. We have
preferred the latter course, as more conducive to the objects we have in
view in these papers.


SPEECH OF SOCRATES BEFORE HIS JUDGES

In what manner, O Athenians, you have been affected by my accusers, I
know not; I myself, in listening to them, almost forgot that I was
myself, so plausibly did they speak. Although, of what they said, not
one word, I may say, was true. Among the many falsehoods which they told
you, one in particular excited my astonishment; when they said that you
should beware lest you be deceived by me, who am a powerful speaker.
For, their not being ashamed to be immediately contradicted by the fact,
when I am seen to be not at all a powerful speaker, appeared to me most
shameless. Unless, indeed, they call him a powerful speaker who speaks
the truth. If so, I admit myself to be an orator of a different kind
from them. They, as I affirm, have spoken no truth; from me you will
hear all the truth. Not, indeed, O Athenians, a speech like theirs, all
tricked out with fine words and phrases: what I say, will be said
unstudiedly, in such words as offer themselves. For I am convinced that
all which I say is just; none of you need expect any thing else of me.
Nor would it become these years, O Athenians, to appear before you
spinning phrases like a stripling. And this, O Athenians, I especially
solicit of you; that if you hear me make my defence in the very same
style of language in which I am accustomed to speak in the streets and
public places, where most of you have heard me, and elsewhere, you will
neither be surprised nor clamorous. For the fact is this: At the age of
seventy and more, I now for the first time appear in a court of justice;
I am, Edition: current; Page: [153] therefore, a complete stranger to
the ways of speaking in this place. As then, if I were really a
stranger, you would have pardoned me for speaking in the language and
style in which I was brought up, so I now ask of you this justice, as it
appears to me, that you will disregard the manner of my speech—which
perhaps may be better, perhaps worse—but consider and attend to this,
whether what I say is just or not. For that is the excellence of a
judge; an orator’s is to speak the truth.

I have to defend myself first, O Athenians, from the first false
accusations against me, and from my first accusers; and afterwards from
the more recent ones. For I have had many accusers; who have spoken
falsely of me now for many years: whom I fear more than Anytus and his
associates, although these also are formidable; but those are still more
so, O Athenians, who have begun with most of you from your childhood
upwards, and poured into your ears false accusations of me, saying that
there is one Socrates, a wise man, who has explored the things which are
in the sky and under the earth, and who makes the worse appear the
better reason.[*] They, O Athenians, who have spread such a character of
me, are my really dangerous accusers; for their hearers believe that
those who are addicted to such inquiries do not even believe in gods.*
These accusers, too, are numerous; they have now spoken ill of me for a
long time, and to many of you in the most credulous time of your lives,
when you were children, or mere lads, and with all the advantage of an
undefended cause, no one replying to them. And, what is hardest of all,
one cannot so much as know the names of any of these people, except,
perhaps, a play-writer or so.† Neither they who, by calumnies and
invidious speaking, have wrought upon you, nor they who, being
themselves persuaded, have persuaded others, can be cited to appear in
this place. I cannot confute them, but must fight, as it were, with
shadows, and refute when there is no one here to answer my questions.
Consider, then, that I have to do with two sets of Edition: current;
Page: [154] accusers, my present ones, and those ancient ones whom I
have mentioned; and observe, that I must reply to the old accusers
first, for you heard them first, and during a much longer time than
these later ones.

Be it so, then; I must defend myself, and endeavour to expel from your
minds, in so short a time, the calumny which has had so long a time to
fix itself there. I should be glad (if it be for your good and my own)
that this were possible; but I think it is difficult; I do not conceal
from myself the weightiness of the task. The event, however, must be as
the god pleases. I must obey the law, and make my defence.

Let us go back, then, to the beginning, and see upon what accusation has
been founded that prejudice against me, in reliance on which Melitus has
brought the present impeachment. What, then, did my assailants allege?
for we must consider them as accusers, and read the words of their
indictment. “Socrates is guilty of occupying himself with frivolous and
criminal pursuits; exploring the things which are under the earth and in
the sky; and making the worse appear the better reason; and teaching
others to do the same.” Something of this sort is what they impute to
me; and you have yourselves seen, in the comedy of Aristophanes, a
certain Socrates, who professes to walk the air, with much other
trifling, about which I do not understand one jot. And I do not speak in
disparagement of such knowledge, if there be any one who is wise in
these matters; but I have no concern with them. And I call most of
yourselves to witness, and beg you to inform and to ask each other,
(those of you who have ever heard me converse,) and there are many of
them among you: tell to one another, if any of you has ever heard in my
conversation anything, great or small, on such subjects; and by this you
will know, that all the other things which are vulgarly said about me
are of the same value. Again, if you have heard any one say that I
undertake to instruct people, and receive money for it, neither is this
true. I think it a fine thing, no doubt, if any one is capable of
instructing people, as Gorgias of Leontium does, and Prodicus of Ceos,
and Hippias of Elis. Each of these, going to one city after another, is
able to draw round him the young men, who, though they are at liberty to
converse gratis with whomsoever they please of their own citizens, are
persuaded to quit the society of these, and, resorting to the
new-comers, converse with them, not only paying them money, but
rendering gratitude to them besides. There is now in this very town a
wise man from Paros, whose arrival I happened to hear of; for I was
accidentally in company with a man who has paid more money to sophists
than all other men put together, Callias, the son of Hipponicus. I said
to him, (for he has two sons,) “O Callias, if your sons had been colts
or steers, we could have found and hired a proper superintendent of
their education, who could have formed them to all the good qualities
befitting their nature; but now, since they are men, what Edition:
current; Page: [155] superintendent have you in view for them? Who is
there that is knowing in the good qualities of a man and a citizen? for
I suppose that you must have considered the matter, having sons to bring
up. Is there such a person,” said I, “or not?” “There is,” he answered.
“Who,” asked I, “and of what country, and for what price does he teach?”
“Euenus of Paros,” replied he; “and his price is five minæ.” And I
felicitated Euenus, if he in reality possesses this art, and is so
zealous in the practice of it. I, too, therefore, should be proud, and
make much of myself, if I knew these matters; but I do not know them, O
Athenians.

Some of you may, perhaps, answer, “But, O Socrates, what, then, is your
affair? and whence did these accusations arise? for you would not have
been so much heard of or talked about, if you had done nothing strange,
or different from other people: tell us, therefore, what it is, that we
may not be left to conjecture.” This appears to me a very fair question;
and I will try to explain to you what it is which has made me so talked
about, and so calumniated. Listen, then: and perhaps some of you may
think I am in jest; be well persuaded, however, that I am telling you
the whole truth. I, O Athenians, have acquired this reputation, from no
other cause than a certain wisdom. What kind of wisdom? That which,
perhaps, is the true human wisdom; and the fact seems to be that I
possess this wisdom: they whom I have just spoken of have perhaps a
wisdom greater than that of man; but I certainly do not possess it, and
whoever says so speaks falsely, and wishes to slander me. And do not
clamour, O Athenians, even if I seem to speak boastfully; for what I am
about to say does not come from myself, but from a source worthy of your
attention. I shall produce the Delphic god as a witness to you
respecting my wisdom, whether I have any, and of what sort. You knew
Chærephon, doubtless. He was my associate from youth, and was also an
associate of the Athenian many; he quitted his country with you, and
returned with you.* And you know what kind of a man was Chærephon, how
energetic in whatsoever he engaged in. He once, going to Delphos, had
the boldness to put this question to the oracle; (do not clamour, O
Athenians;) he asked whether there existed any person wiser than I? And
the oracle answered that there was no person wiser. And to this, since
Chærephon himself is dead, his brother will bear witness before you.

Observe now why I mention this; for I am now going to show you how the
prejudice against me arose. Hearing the response of the oracle, I
considered with myself, What can it mean? what is its hidden
significance? for I am not conscious to myself of being wise in any
thing, great or small; what, Edition: current; Page: [156] then, can the
god mean by calling me the wisest of men? for his words cannot be
falsehoods. And for a long time I was puzzled, but at last, with much
difficulty, I hit upon a way of examining the matter. I went to one of
those who are esteemed wise, thinking that here, if anywhere, I should
prove the oracle to be wrong, and be able to say to it, “Here is a man
wiser than I.” After examining this man, (I need not mention his name,
but he was one of the politicians,) and conversing with him, it was my
opinion that this man seemed to many others, and especially to himself,
to be wise, but was not so. Thereupon I tried to convince him that he
thought himself wise, and was not. By this means I offended him, and
many of the bystanders. When I went away I said to myself, “I am wiser
than this man: for neither of us, it would seem, knows any thing
valuable; but he, not knowing, fancies he does know: I, as I really do
not know, so I do not think I know. I seem, therefore, to be, in one
small matter, wiser than he, viz. in not thinking that I know what in
truth I know not.” After this I went to another, who was esteemed still
wiser than he, and came to the same result; and by this I affronted him
too, and many others. I went on in the same manner, perceiving, with
sorrow and fear, that I was making enemies; but it seemed necessary to
postpone all other considerations to the service of the god; and,
therefore, to seek for the meaning of the oracle, by going to all who
appeared to know any thing. And, O Athenians, (for I must speak the
truth,) the impression made on me was this: The persons of most
reputation seemed to me to be nearly the most deficient of all; other
persons, of much smaller account, seemed much more rational people.

I must relate to you my wanderings, and the labours I underwent, that
the truth of the oracle might be fairly tested. When I had done with the
politicians, I went to the poets, tragic, dithyrambic, and others,
thinking that I should surely find myself less knowing than they. Taking
up those of their poems which appeared to me the most laboured, I asked
them (that I might at the same time learn something from them) what
these poems meant? I am ashamed, O Athenians, to say the truth, but I
must say it; there was scarcely a person present who could not have
spoken better than they, concerning their own poems. I soon found, that
what the poets do, they accomplish, not by wisdom, but by a kind of
natural turn, and an enthusiam like that of prophets and those who utter
oracles; for these, too, speak many fine things, but do not know one
particle of what they speak. The poets seemed to me to be in a similar
case. And I perceived, at the same time, that, on account of their
poetry, they fancied themselves the wisest of mankind in other things,
in which they were not so. I left them, therefore, thinking myself to
have the same superiority over them which I had over the politicians.
Lastly, I resorted to the artificers; for I was conscious that I myself
knew, in a manner, nothing at all, but I was aware that I should find
Edition: current; Page: [157] them knowing many valuable things. And in
this I was not mistaken; they knew things which I knew not, and were so
far wiser than I. But they appeared to me to fall into the same error as
the poets; each, because he was skilled in his own art, insisted upon
being the wisest man in other and the greatest things; and this mistake
of theirs overshadowed what they possessed of wisdom. So that when I
asked myself, by way of verifying the oracle, whether I would rather be
as I now am, equally without their wisdom and their ignorance, or take
the one with the other, I answered that it was better for me to be as I
am.

From this search, O Athenians, the consequences to me have been, on the
one hand, many enmities, and of the most formidable kind, which have
brought upon me many false imputations; but, on the other hand, the name
and general repute of a wise man. For the bystanders, on each occasion,
imagine that I myself am wise in those things in which I refute the
false pretensions of others. The truth, however, O Athenians, is (I
suspect) that the god alone is wise, and that his meaning in the oracle,
was, that human wisdom is worth little or nothing: the name of Socrates
seems to have been introduced, not for commendation, but for a mere
example, as if it had been said, He, O men, is the wisest among you,
who, like Socrates, knows that all his attainments in wisdom amount in
reality to nothing. Meanwhile, I still, for the honour of the god,
continue my search, and examine every one, whether a citizen or a
stranger, whom I think likely to be a wise man: and when I find that he
is not so, I prove that he is not, and so justify the oracle: and by
reason of this occupation, I have no leisure to transact any business of
moment, either for the state or for my own private benefit, but am in
the depth of poverty from having devoted myself to the service of the
god.

Besides this, the young men, those who have most leisure, the sons of
the rich, take pleasure in following me, liking to hear the men probed
and sifted; and they themselves often imitate me, and attempt to examine
others; and they find, I imagine, great abundance of persons who fancy
themselves knowing, but who really know either very little, or nothing.
Those who are thus examined, are angry with me, not with themselves, and
say that there is one Socrates, a wicked man, who corrupts the youth.
And when any one asks them, by what practices, or by what instructions?
they have nothing to say; for they do not know: but, not to seem at a
loss, they are ready with the imputations which are always at hand to be
cast upon all who philosophize, of studying the sky, and the parts under
ground, and not believing in gods, and making the worse appear the
better reason. They do not, I fancy, like to say the truth, that they
have been convicted of pretending to knowledge without having any.
Being, however, jealous of their reputation, and being much in earnest,
and many in number, and speaking with premeditation and in a plausible
manner about me, they have Edition: current; Page: [158] filled your
ears with false notions of me, from an early period. Of these people,
Melitus, Anytus, and Lycon, are those who have now set upon me: Melitus
to avenge the cause of the poets, Anytus that of the artificers and the
politicians, Lycon that of the orators.* So that, as I said at first, I
shall wonder if I am able, in so short a time, to expel from your minds
a prejudice of such long standing.

This, O Athenians, is the truth; and I have said it, neither dissembling
nor disguising any thing, great or small, although I know that to this
very freespokenness I owe my enemies; which is a sign that I speak
truth, and that the causes of the prejudice against me are those I have
mentioned. And if, either now or hereafter, you examine into the matter,
so you will find it.

To the accusations, then, which were brought against me by my first
accusers, let this be a sufficient reply. I will now attempt to reply to
Melitus, the good and patriotic, as he professes himself; and the rest.

These being a new set of accusers, let us look at their charges, as we
did at those of the others. “Socrates,” they say, “is guilty of
corrupting the youth, and not acknowledging the gods whom the state
acknowledges, but other new δαιμόνια,”† (divinities, dæmons, or things
relating to dæmons,) such is the charge: and of this charge let us
examine each separate part. He says, then, that I am guilty of
corrupting the youth. But I, O Athenians, say that Melitus is guilty of
solemn trifling; bringing men with so much levity before a criminal
tribunal, and pretending to be earnestly concerned about things which he
never paid the slighest attention to. That this is so, I will endeavour
to prove to you.

Come hither, O Melitus, and answer me: You are very anxious that the
young may be as good as possible?

Melitus.

I am.

Socrates.

Come then, tell the tribunal, who is it that makes them good? for it is
plain that you know, since you are so concerned about them. You have
found who it is that corrupts them, you say, and have pointed him out
and brought him hither: now point out who makes them better. Do you see,
O Melitus, that you are silent and cannot tell? Is not this shameful,
and a sufficient proof that, as I say, you have never concerned yourself
about the matter? But say, my good friend, who it is that makes them
better?

M.

The laws.

S.

That was not what I meant, O most excellent person. I asked what man? a
man who in the first place, knows the very thing you mention, the laws.

Edition: current; Page: [159]
M.

These, O Socrates, whom you now see; the judges.

S.

How, O Melitus? Are these people able to educate the young and make them
better?

M.

Most certainly.

S.

All of them? or only some?

M.

All.

S.

You say well, by Juno, and there is an ample supply of benefactors.* And
the bystanders? Are they also instructors of youth?

M.

They also.

S.

And the senators?†

M.

The senators likewise.

S.

And the members of the assembly of the people? they do not corrupt the
youth? or do they too, one and all, make them better?

M.

They do.

S.

Then it seems, all the Athenians make the youth good and virtuous except
me; I alone corrupt them. Do you assert this?

M.

Most certainly I do.

S.

I am a very unlucky person, according to you. And tell me: do you think
this is also the case with horses? Are those who make them better, all
mankind; and is there one single person who spoils them? Or is the case
quite the reverse; one, or a very few (those who have attended to the
subject) capable of making them better; the many, if they try their hand
upon horses, spoiling them? Is it not so, O Melitus, both with regard to
horses and all other animals? Certainly, whether you and Anytus say so
or not. It would be a very happy thing for the youth if there were but
one person who spoils them, and all others benefited them. But you have
sufficiently shown, O Melitus, that you never bestowed a thought upon
the instruction of youth; but have yourself been utterly indifferent to
the matters about which you accuse me.

Tell us again, O Melitus; is it better to have good, or wicked people
for our fellow-citizens? Answer, friend; the question I ask is not
difficult. Are not the wicked always doing some evil to those who are
nearest to them, the good always doing some good?

M.

Undoubtedly.

S.

Is there any one who would rather be hurt than benefited by those he
associates with? Answer, most excellent person: for the law, too, bids
you answer. Does any one wish to be hurt?

M.

No, certainly.

S.

Well, then: do you bring me here on the charge of corrupting the youth,
and making them wicked, intentionally, or unintentionally?

Edition: current; Page: [160]
M.

Intentionally.

S.

What! are you, O Melitus, at your age, so much wiser than I at mine,
that you know the wicked to be always doing some hurt, the good always
some good, to those who are nearest to them; but I am so ignorant as not
to know that if I make any of those with whom I associate wicked, I am
in danger of suffering some evil from them, and, therefore, as you
affirm, intentionally do this great evil? I do not believe this, O
Melitus, nor, I think, will any other human being. Either I do not
corrupt the youth, or if I do, it is unintentionally, and either way you
are a calumniator. But if I corrupt them unintentionally, it is not the
law to bring men here for such offences when unintentional, but to
instruct them and admonish them in private; for it is evident that what
I do unintentionally, I shall cease doing if I am taught better. But you
avoided conversing with me and instructing me, and have now brought me
here, whither the law ordains to bring those who require punishment, not
teaching.

What I affirmed, O Athenians, is already evident, that Melitus never
gave himself a moment’s concern about these matters. But yet tell us, O
Melitus, how you say that I corrupt the youth? In the manner which you
mention in the indictment, viz., by teaching them not to acknowledge the
gods whom the state acknowledges, but other new δαιμόνια?

M.

Most certainly, I affirm it.

S.

By those gods, O Melitus, who are now in question, I pray you explain
yourself more clearly. I cannot make out which of two things you say. Is
it that I teach the youth to believe that there are gods, and am myself
not altogether an atheist, but believe in gods, though not the same whom
the state acknowledges, but others; and is this your charge against me,
that I believe in other gods? or do you assert that I do not believe in
any gods at all, and that I teach others the same?

M.

That is what I assert; you believe in no gods at all.

S.

Most wonderful Melitus, what is this you say! I do not, then, like the
rest of mankind, believe the sun and moon to be gods?

M.

No, by Jupiter, O Athenians: for he says that the sun is of stone, and
the moon of earth.

S.

You fancy you are accusing Anaxagoras, most worthy Melitus: and you have
such a contempt for these judges, and think them so ignorant of letters,
as not to know that the writings of Anaxagoras, of Clazomene, are full
of this sort of doctrines. So, then, the youth learn from me, what they
may buy sometimes at the theatre* for one drachma, and may then laugh at
Edition: current; Page: [161] Socrates if he pretend that they are his,
especially being so paradoxical. So you really think that I do not
believe in any gods?

M.

In none at all.

S.

You are incredulous, O Melitus; you do not even give credence to your
own word. This man, O Athenians, seems to me to be exceedingly
self-willed and insolent, and to have brought this prosecution against
me from self-will and insolence, and youthful levity. It looks like a
trial of ingenuity; as if he had said to himself: Will the wise Socrates
find out the inconsistency in what I say, or shall I succeed in cheating
him, and the rest of them? For he contradicts himself in the very words
of the accusation; saying, in fact, this “Socrates is guilty of not
believing in gods, but believing in gods.” This looks like a jest.
Attend then, O Athenians, that you may know what I mean: and do you
answer, O Melitus. You, O Athenians, as I begged you at first, remember
not to be clamorous if I speak in my own usual manner.

Is there any one, O Melitus, who believes that there are human things,
but does not believe that there are men? Answer, O Athenians, and do not
clamour. Does any one believe that there are things relating to horses,
but not believe that there are horses? or that there are things relating
to music, but not musicians? Nobody, O best of men; for if you will not
answer, I will answer to you and to the judges. But answer the next
question. Does any one believe that there are (δαιμόνια) things relating
to dæmons, but not believe in dæmons?

M.

No.

S.

How much good you have done, by answering with so much reluctance, and
not until the judges obliged you. You say then, that I believe, and
teach, that there are things relating to dæmons, no matter whether new
or old. I therefore, according to you, believe in things relating to
dæmons, and this you have sworn to in the indictment. But if I believe
in the existence of things relating to dæmons, I must needs believe in
the existence of dæmons: is it not so? It is: for as you will not
answer, I consider you as assenting. But do we not regard dæmons as
either gods or the offspring of gods? Do we, or not?

M.

Yes.

S.

Then if I believe in dæmons, as you say; and if dæmons are a kind of
gods, this is the riddle I said you were playing off upon us, saying
that I, not believing in gods, do nevertheless believe in gods, since I
believe in dæmons. But if dæmons are the offspring of the gods, by the
nymphs, as they say, or in any other way, what human creature can
believe that there exists offspring of gods, but no gods? It would be as
absurd as to believe that there exists offspring of horses and asses,
namely mules, but that there are no horses or asses. It is impossible, O
Melitus, that you can have Edition: current; Page: [162] brought such an
accusation for any purpose but to try us, or because you could find
nothing true to accuse me of. That you should be able to persuade any
person in his senses that the same person can think that there are
things belonging to dæmons and gods, and yet no dæmons, nor gods, nor
demigods, is impossible.

That I am not guilty, O Athenians, according to the accusation of
Melitus, does not seem to need much proof: what I have said is
sufficient. But what I have already told you, that I am in much odium,
and with many persons, you well know to be true. And this is what will
cause my condemnation, if I be condemned: not Melitus nor Anytus, but
the prejudice and calumny in the minds of the many: which has been the
cause of condemnation to many other and good men, and will continue to
be so, and there is no fear that I shall be the last.[*]

Perhaps, now, some one may say, “Art thou not then ashamed, O Socrates,
of practising a pursuit from which thou art now in danger of death?” To
such a person I may justly make answer, “Thou speakest not well, O
friend, if thou thinkest that a man should calculate the chances of
living or dying (altogether an unimportant matter); instead of
considering this only, when he does anything, whether what he does be
just or unjust, the act of a good or of a bad man. For by thy way of
thinking, the demigods who perished at Troy are worthy of no admiration;
even the son of Thetis, who so despised danger in comparison with any
dishonour, that when his mother, a goddess, said to him when eager to
slay Hector, ‘My son, if thou avenge thy friend Patroclus, and destroy
Hector, thou thyself wilt die,’ he, fearing much more to live unworthy
and not avenge his friends, than to die, answered, ‘May I die
immediately, after punishing the man who has injured me, that I may not
remain the scoff of my countrymen, a burthen to the earth.’ ”[†]

Thus it is, O Athenians: wheresoever our post is,—whether we choose it,
thinking it the best, or are placed in it by a superior,—there, as I
hold, we ought to remain, and suffer all chances, neither reckoning
death nor any other consequence as worse than dishonour. I, therefore,
should be greatly in the wrong, O Athenians, if when I was commanded by
the superiors whom you set over me, at Potidæa and Amphipolis and
Delium,* I remained (like other people) where those superiors posted me,
and perilled my life; but when, as I believed, the god commanded me, and
bade me pass my life in philosophizing, and examining myself and others,
then, fearing Edition: current; Page: [163] either death or anything
else, I should abandon my post. Then, indeed, might I with justice be
brought before the tribunal, and accused of not believing in gods; if I
disobeyed their oracles, and feared death, and thought myself wise, not
being so. To be afraid of death, O Athenians, is to fancy ourselves
wise, not being so; for it is to fancy that we know what we do not know.
No one knows whether death is not the greatest possible good to man. But
people fear it, as if they knew it to be the greatest of evils. What is
this but the most discreditable ignorance, to think we know what we know
not? I, O Athenians, differ perhaps in this from persons in general,
(and if I am wiser than any other person it is probably in this,) that
not knowing sufficiently about a future state, I do not fancy I know.
This, however, I do know; that to do injustice, and to resist the
injunctions of one who is better than myself, be he god or man, is evil
and disgraceful. I shall not, therefore, fly to the evils which I know
to be evils, from fear of that which, for aught I know, may be a good.

If, therefore, you were to acquit me, (in spite of the predictions of
Anytus, who said that either I ought not to have been tried, or if
tried, it is impossible not to put me to death, since if I escape, all
your sons will practise the instructions of Socrates, and be ruined);
if, to prevent these consequences, you should say to me, “O Socrates, we
will now, in spite of what Anytus said, let you off, but upon condition
that you shall no longer persevere in your search, in your
philosophizing; if you are again convicted of doing so, you shall be put
to death”—If, I say, you should let me off on these conditions, I should
say to you,—O Athenians, I love and cherish you, but I will obey the god
rather than you; and as long as I breathe, and it is not out of my
power, I will not cease to philosophize, and to exhort you to
philosophy, and point out the way to whomsoever among you I fall in
with; saying, as I am wont, “O most worthy person, art thou, an
Athenian, of the greatest city and the most celebrated for wisdom and
power, not ashamed that thou studiest to possess as much money as
possible, and reputation, and honour, but concernest not thyself even to
the smallest degree about Intellect, and Truth, and the well-being of
thy mental nature?” And if any of you shall dispute the fact, and say
that he does concern himself about these things, I will not let him off,
or depart, but will question him, and examine, and confute him; and if
he seem to me not to possess virtue, but to assert that he does, I will
reproach him for valuing least what is highest worth, and highest what
is most worthless. This will I do both to young and old, whomsoever I
meet with; to citizen and stranger, but most to my fellow-citizens, as
connected with me by a nearer tie. For these, as you well know, are the
commands of the god. And to me it appears, that no good can happen to
the state greater than my service of the god: for I pass my whole time
doing nothing whatever but inciting you, both the young and the old,
Edition: current; Page: [164] to care neither for body nor estate in
preference to, nor in comparison with, the excellence of the soul;
telling you that wealth does not produce virtue, but virtue wealth, and
all other good things, to mankind, both collectively and individually.
If, then, saying these things, I corrupt the youth, these things must be
noxious: for if any one asserts that I say any other things than these,
he speaks falsely. I say, therefore, O Athenians, whether you believe
Anytus or not, whether you acquit me or not, let it be with the
knowledge that I shall do no other things than these—not though I should
die many deaths.

Do not clamour, O Athenians, but abide by what I requested of you, not
to bawl out against what I say, but to listen to it; and I think you
will be the better for hearing it. I have still some other things to
say, at which you will, perhaps, cry out; but I exhort you not to do so.
Know well, O Athenians, that if you put me to death, being such as I
describe myself, you will not hurt me more than you will hurt
yourselves. Me Anytus and Melitus will not hurt; they cannot. It is not
permitted that a better man should be hurt by a worse. Kill me, or exile
me, or deprive me of civic rights, they may. And these, to Melitus,
perhaps, and to others as well as him, may appear great evils; but not
to me. To do what he is now doing, to attempt to kill another man
unjustly, seems to me a far greater evil. Nor am I now, O Athenians, as
you may perhaps suppose, pleading for myself,—far from it,—but for you;
that you may not, by condemning me, commit a crime against the gift
which the god has given to you. For if you kill me, you will not easily
find another person like me, who in sober truth (though it may sound
ridiculous) am sent by the god to this city, as to a strong and generous
horse, who is somewhat sluggish from his size, and requires to be
stimulated by a stinging insect. The god, as it seems to me, has given
me to you as such an insect, to goad you by persuasions and reproaches,
settling upon one of you after another. You will not, O Athenians,
easily find another such man: and therefore, if you take my advice, you
will spare me. But you, perhaps, being angry, like sleepers awakened,
will strike at me, and being persuaded by Anytus, will inconsiderately
put me to death; and then pass the remainder of your lives in slumber,
unless the god in his care for you should send to you some one else.

That I am such a person as one bestowed on you by the god might be
expected to be, you may judge from this: it is not like the ways of mere
humanity, to neglect all my own concerns, and let my private affairs be
so many years uncared for, devoting myself to your interests; seeking
each of you, as if I were his father or his elder brother, and inciting
him to the pursuit of virtue. If I gained anything by it, and gave these
exhortations for pay or reward, there would be something intelligible in
it. But now you yourselves see, that my accusers, shameless as they have
shown themselves Edition: current; Page: [165] in all their other
accusations, could not carry their shamelessness so far as to affirm,
producing testimony, that I ever took or asked reward from any one: for
I have truly a good and sufficient witness to my assertion, my poverty.

Perhaps it may appear strange that I go about and busy myself with
giving these exhortations in private, but do not venture to come forward
in public and advise the people in the public assembly. The cause of
this is, what you have often heard me speak of; that I have a divine (or
dæmonic) monitor; which Melitus alluded to in the indictment, and
ludicrously perverted. This is, a voice, which from my childhood upwards
has occasionally visited me, always to dissuade me from something which
I was about to do, but never instigating me to any thing. It is this
voice which opposes my meddling in public affairs. And rightly, in my
opinion, has it done so: for know, Athenians, that if I had long ago
attempted to interfere in politics, I should long ago have perished, and
done no good either to you or myself. And be not angry with me for
saying the truth. It is impossible that any human being should escape
destruction, who sincerely opposes himself to you, or to any other
multitude, and strives to prevent many injustices and illegalities from
being transacted in the state. He who means really to contend for the
right, if he would be unharmed for even a short time, must keep to
private, and avoid public life.

I will produce to you signal proofs of this; not words, but, what you
most honour, deeds. Hear, then, the things which have happened to me;
that you may know that I would never, from the fear of death, have
succumbed to any one contrary to justice, and not succumbing, would
inevitably have been destroyed. What I will tell you, may sound arrogant
and presuming; but it is true.

The only office I ever held in the state, O Athenians, was that of a
member of the Senate of Five Hundred; and it fell to my tribe (the tribe
Antiochis) to preside, when you decided that the ten generals, accused
of not taking up the bodies of the slain in the seafight,* should be
tried collectively; an illegal decision, as since that time has become
the opinion of you all. On that occasion, I alone of the Prytanes†
resisted your doing any thing contrary to law. The orators cried out to
indict me instantly and drag me to prison, and you assented by
acclamation; but I preferred to run Edition: current; Page: [166] all
risks on the side of justice and the law, rather than to join with you
in an unjust resolve from fear of chains or death. This happened while
the state was under a democracy. When an oligarchy succeeded, the Thirty
sent for me and four others to the Tholus,* and commanded us to proceed
to Salamis and bring from thence Leon, the Salaminian, that he might be
put to death. They at that time gave such commands to many persons,
wishing to compromise the greatest number of persons possible as
accomplices in their proceedings. I then, not by word but by deed,
proved that I do not care one jot for death, but every thing for
avoiding any unjust or impious action. That government, powerful as it
was, did not intimidate me into any act of injustice; but when we
quitted the Tholus, the other four went to Salamis and brought Leon from
thence, but I returned home. Perhaps this would have cost me my life,
had not that government soon after been overthrown. To these facts I can
produce many witnesses.

Do you think, then, that I could have lived so many years, if I had
mingled in public affairs, and, as befits a good man, had always given
my aid to the just cause, and made that, as I ought, my grand object?
Far from it, O Athenians; neither I nor any other man. But I, throughout
my whole life, and in whatever public transaction I may have been
engaged in, shall always be found such as I am in private, never
tolerating the slightest violation of justice, either in any one else,
or in those whom my calumniators assert to be my disciples. But I have
never been any one’s teacher; though if any one, whether young or old,
desired to stand by and listen to me, speaking and following my own
path, I never grudged to allow him. Neither is it my practice to
converse with people when they pay me money, and not otherwise; but I
permit rich and poor alike to question me, or if they please, to answer
my questions, and to hear what I have to say. And whether any of these
turn out a good or a bad man, I cannot justly be held accountable,†
since I never taught nor undertook to teach them anything. If any one
affirms that he ever learnt or heard from me in private, any thing but
what all other persons have heard, be assured that he speaks falsely.

But why, then, do some persons take pleasure in frequenting my society?
You have already heard, O Athenians; I have told you the whole truth;
they like to hear those persons exposed, who fancy themselves wise and
are not; Edition: current; Page: [167] for it is not unpleasant. But to
me, as I affirm, it has been enjoined by the god to do this,—enjoined in
oracles, and in dreams, and in every other way in which Divine ordinance
commands anything to a human being.

These things, O Athenians, are true; and could easily be disproved, if
they were not. For if I corrupt some of the young men, and have already
corrupted others, they, if any of them growing older have perceived that
I had given them evil counsels when young, ought to appear now, and
charge me with it, and punish me; or if they were unwilling, some of
their relations, their fathers or brothers, if these people have
suffered any evil from me, should remember it now. There are many such
persons present, whom I now see; Criton, my contemporary and member of
the same ward,* the father of Critobulus, here present; Lysanias, the
father of Æschines, who is present; Antiphon, the father of Epigenes;
others, again, whose brothers have kept company with me; Nicostratus,
the son of Theodotides, brother of Theodotus; (Theodotus himself is
dead, and therefore cannot have dissuaded his brother from appearing
against me;) Paralus, the son of Demodocus, whose brother Theages was;
Adeimantus, the son of Ariston, and brother of Plato here; Æantodorus,
brother of this Apollodorus; and many others I could mention. Some one
of these, Melitus should have produced as a witness; and if he then
forgot, let him produce them now, and I will give place. But you will
find the very contrary of this, O judges; they are all eager to assist
me—the corrupter and injurer of their relatives, as Melitus and Anytus
affirm. Those indeed, who have themselves been corrupted by me, might
naturally enough be supposed to take my side: but the uncorrupted, some
of them elderly men, the relatives of the others—what reason can they
have for aiding me, but the right and just one, their knowledge that
Melitus is a calumniator, and that I speak the truth?

These things, O Athenians, and such as these, are what I have to say in
my defence. Perhaps some one among you may be displeased with me, when
he bethinks himself that in the trial which preceded mine, the accused,
though he had less at stake, entreated the judges, with many tears; and
brought hither, to excite their pity, his children, and others of his
relations and friends; while I shall do nothing of the kind, although
the penalty which, as it may seem, I am in danger of, is the severest of
all. Some of you, perhaps, thinking of these things, may feel harshly
towards me, and may give an angry vote. If any one among you feels thus,
which I hope is not the case, I think I may very properly hold the
following discourse to him. I too, most worthy person, have relatives: I
am not (as Homer says) sprung from an oak tree, or from a rock, but from
human beings;[*] and I Edition: current; Page: [168] have not only
relations, but three sons, O Athenians; one of them a youth, the two
others still children. Nevertheless, I shall not, bringing any of them
here, implore you to acquit me. And why? Not from pride, O Athenians,
nor from disdain of you; but for this reason: whether I look upon death
with courage or with fear is another matter: but with a view to our
reputation, both mine and yours, and that of the city itself, it does
not seem to me honourable that I should do such things at my age, and
with such a name as I have, whether merited or not. Men certainly
believe that Socrates is in some way superior to the multitude of
mankind. It would be shameful if those among you who are esteemed
superior to the rest, whether in wisdom or in courage, or in any other
virtue, should conduct themselves like so many others whom I have seen
on their trial, and who might have been taken for people of some
account, but who moved heaven and earth to be acquitted, as if it were
something dreadful to die; as though they expected to be immortal unless
you should put them to death. Such persons appear to me to bring
discredit on the city; a foreigner might conclude that the most virtuous
among the Athenians, they whom the Athenians select from themselves as
the worthiest, for public offices and other honours, are in nothing
superior to women. Such things, O Athenians, we, who are thought to be
of some account, ought neither to do, nor if we did, ought you to suffer
us, but, on the contrary, to show that you will much rather condemn
those who enact these pathetic dramas, and make the city ridiculous,
than those who refrain from them. And besides the discredit, it does not
seem to me even just, to supplicate the judge, and escape by
supplication, but to instruct and convince him. For the judge does not
sit here to make a favour of justice, but impartially to inquire into
it; and he has sworn not to gratify whomsoever he pleases, but to judge
according to the laws. We, therefore, should not accustom you, nor
should you let yourselves be accustomed, to violate your oaths: it would
be impiety in both of us. Do not then, O Athenians, demand of me to do
such things towards you as I deem to be neither beautiful, nor just, nor
holy; especially as I am actually on trial for impiety. If I should work
upon you and influence your decision by supplications, when you have
sworn to do justice, I should indeed teach that you do not believe in
gods, and my defence of myself would be an accusation against myself
that I believe not in them. But far is this from the truth. I believe in
them, O Athenians, as not one of my accusers does. And I commit to you
and to the god to decide concerning me, in whatever way shall be best
for you and for me.


AFTER THE VERDICT OF CONDEMNATION

Among many things, O Athenians, which prevent me from feeling indignant
at your having condemned me, one is, that what has happened was not
Edition: current; Page: [169] unexpected by me. Much rather do I wonder
at the number of votes in my favour. I did not expect to be condemned by
so small a majority, but by a large one: it now, however, appears, that
if but thirty of the votes had been given differently, I should have
escaped. As far as Melitus is concerned, I have escaped as it is: and it
is even clear to every one, that if Anytus and Lycon had not appeared as
my accusers, he would have been liable to the penalty of one thousand
drachmæ, not having obtained a fifth part of the votes.*

The penalty proposed by my accuser is death. What penalty shall I, on my
part, propose?† surely that which I deserve. Well, then, what do I
deserve to suffer or to pay, because I never relaxed in instructing
myself, but neglecting what the many care for, money-getting and
household management, and military commands, and civil offices, and
speech-making, and all the political clubs and societies in the city;
thinking myself, in fact, too honest to follow these pursuits and be
safe; I did not go where I could be of no use either to you or to
myself, but went to each man individually, to confer on him the greatest
of all benefits; attempting to persuade every one of you, to think of
none of his own concerns till he had looked to making himself as good
and as wise as possible; nor of the city’s concerns till he had looked
to making the city so; and to pursue all other things in a similar
spirit. What, then, ought to be done to me for such conduct? Some good,
O Athenians, if I am really to be treated according to my deserts; and a
good of such a kind as beseems me. What, then, beseems a man in poor
circumstances, your benefactor, and requiring leisure to prosecute his
exhortations? There is nothing, O Athenians, which would be so suitable
for such a man to receive, as a maintenance at the public expense.‡ It
would befit him much better than any of you who may have carried away
the prize of horse or chariot-racing at the Olympic contests. For, such
a man makes you only seem happy, but I make you be so: and he does not
require a maintenance, but I do. If, therefore, I must estimate myself
justly according to my deserts, I rate myself at a maintenance in the
Prytaneum.

Edition: current; Page: [170]
Perhaps I seem to you, in saying this, as in what I said about
supplication and entreaty, to be influenced by pride. The fact, however,
is not so: but rather, as I am now about to tell you. I know that I do
not intentionally injure any one; but I am not able to convince you of
it; for we have conversed together but a short time: if, indeed, it were
the law with you, as in other countries, not to terminate capital trials
in one day, but continue them through several, you could then have been
convinced; but now, it is not easy, in a short time, to conquer strong
prejudices. I, then, being convinced that I wrong no one, cannot consent
to wrong myself, by affirming that I am worthy of any evil, and
proposing that any evil should be inflicted upon me as a penalty. From
what fear should I do so? From the fear lest I should suffer what
Melitus proposes? when I affirm that I know not whether it be an evil or
a good? Shall I, then, choose something which I well know to be an evil,
and propose that as the penalty? Imprisonment, for example? And why
should I seek to live in a prison, at the mercy of every successive
police officer?* A fine? and imprisonment until I pay it? That would be
the same thing; for I have no means of paying it. Shall I propose
banishment? for perhaps you might sentence me to that. But I must be
very fond of life, O Athenians, if I am so bad a calculator as not to
compute that if you, who are my countrymen, have not been able to bear
my ways and my sayings, but have found them burthensome and invidious,
and now seek to get rid of them, it is not likely that other people will
bear them easily. Far from it, O Athenians. It would be an unworthy life
for me, exiled at my age, to live in perpetual wanderings and
banishments from one city to another. For, I well know, that
whithersoever I go, the young men will listen to my discourses as they
do here. And if I repel them, they, by their influence with the older
people, will drive me from the place: but if I admit them, their fathers
and relations will do it for their sake. Perhaps somebody may say, But
canst thou not, O Socrates, going into exile, live there in peace and
silence? Here it is that I have the hardest task to persuade you; for,
if I say that this would be to disobey the god, and that I, therefore,
cannot remain silent, you will think it ironical, and disbelieve it. And
if, again, I say that the greatest good possible for man is, to discuss
daily concerning virtue, and the other matters on which you hear me
converse and examine myself and others, and that to live an unexamined
life is not endurable, you will still less believe me. The fact,
however, is as I say, but it is not easy to make it apparent.

I am not used to pronounce myself deserving of any evil. If I had money,
Edition: current; Page: [171] I would estimate my penalty at as much
money as I was able to pay, for it would have been no damage to me; but
now—I have none; unless you are willing to fix the penalty at what I am
able to pay. Perhaps I could pay as much as a silver mina: at this,
therefore, I rate the penalty. Plato here, and Criton, and Critobulus,
and Apollodorus, O Athenians, bid me rate it at thirty minæ, and they
undertake to be my sureties. I do so, therefore, and their security is
adequate.


AFTER THE DECLARATION OF THE SENTENCE

It is for the sake of but a short span, O Athenians, that you have
incurred the imputation, from those who wish to speak evil against the
city, of having put to death Socrates, a wise man, (for those who are
inclined to reproach you, will say that I am wise even if I am not). Had
you waited a short time, the thing would have happened without your
agency; for you see my years; I am far advanced in life, and near to
death. I address this not to all of you, but to those who have voted for
the capital sentence. And this too I say to the same persons: Perhaps
you think that I have been condemned from want of skill in such modes of
working upon your minds, as I might have employed with success if I had
thought it right to employ all means in order to escape from
condemnation. Far from it. I have been condemned, not for want of things
to say, but for want of daring and shamelessness; because I did not
choose to say to you the things which would have been pleasantest to you
to hear, weeping and lamenting, and doing and saying other things which
I affirm to be unworthy of me; as you are accustomed to see others do.
But neither did I then think fit, because of my danger, to do anything
unworthy of a freeman; nor do I now repent of having thus defended
myself; I would far rather have made the one defence and die, than have
made the other and live. Neither in a court of justice, nor in war,
ought we to make it our object, that, whatever happen, we may escape
death. In battle, it is often evident that a man may save his life by
throwing away his arms, and imploring mercy of his pursuers; and in all
other dangers there are many contrivances by which a person may get off
with life, if he dare do or say everything. The difficulty, O Athenians,
is not to escape from death, but from guilt; for guilt is swifter than
death, and runs faster. And now I, being old, and slow of foot, have
been overtaken by death, the slower of the two; but my accusers, who are
brisk and vehement, by wickedness, the swifter. We quit this place, I
having been sentenced by you to death, but they, having sentence passed
upon them by Truth, of guilt and injustice. I submit to my punishment,
and they to theirs. These things, perhaps, are as they should be, and
for the best.

Edition: current; Page: [172]
But I wish, O men who have condemned me, to prophesy to you what is next
to come; for I am in the position in which men are most wont to
prophesy, being at the point of death. I say, then, O you who have slain
me—that immediately after my death there will come upon you a far
severer punishment than that which you have inflicted upon me. For you
have done this, thinking by it to escape from being called to account
for your lives. But I affirm that the very reverse will happen to you.
There will be many to call you to account, whom I have hitherto
restrained, and whom you saw not: and being younger they will give you
more annoyance, and you will be still more provoked. For if you think,
by putting men to death, to deter others from reproaching you with
living amiss, you think ill. That mode of protecting yourselves is
neither very possible, nor very noble: the noblest and the easiest too,
is not to cut off other people, but so to order yourselves, as to obtain
the greatest excellence. Having prophesied thus to those who have
condemned me, I leave them.

With those who voted for my acquittal, I would gladly, while the
officers are busy, and I am not yet going to the place where I am to be
put to death, converse a little about this which has happened. Stay with
me, my friends, until then; for I would explain to you, as my well
wishers, the meaning of what has now happened to me. There has occurred
to me, O judges, (for you I may rightly call by that name,) something
surprising. My accustomed dæmonic warning has, in all former times, been
very frequent, and given on small occasions, if I was about to do any
thing not for my good. But now, as you see, those things have happened
to me, which are generally esteemed the worst of evils; yet the divine
monitor did not warn me, neither when I left my home in the morning, nor
when I came up hither to the judgment-seat, nor at any time when I was
speaking; though on other occasions I have often, while speaking,
experienced the warning, and been checked in what I was about to say.
But in neither word nor deed connected with this business, have I been
checked by the sign. What do I suppose to be the cause? I will tell you.
This which has happened is most likely a good; and those of us who think
death an evil are probably in the wrong. For the accustomed warning
would certainly have been given to me, if what I was about to do had not
been for my good.

We may also, from the following considerations, conclude that there is
much hope of its being a good. For death must be one of two things:
either the dead are incapable of feeling or perceiving anything; or
death is, as we are told, a change of abode, a passage of the soul from
this to some other place. Now, if after death there be no sensation, but
it be like a sleep in which there are no dreams, death is a mighty gain.
For if any one were to choose from his life, a night in which he had
slept without dreaming, and Edition: current; Page: [173] comparing with
this all the other nights and days of his life, were required to say in
how many of them he had lived better and more pleasantly than in that
night, I imagine that not a private man merely, but the Great King,
would find that such days and nights were soon counted. If then this be
death, it is a gain: since all eternity would not thus appear longer
than one night. But if death be to quit this place for another, and if
it be true as is affirmed, that in that other place is the abode of all
the dead; what greater good can there be, O judges, than this? If,
arriving in the other world, and leaving these people who call
themselves judges, we shall see the real judges, who are said to judge
there, Minos and Rhadamanthus and Æacus and Triptolemus, and all other
demigods who lived justly while they were alive, would it not be a noble
journey? What would not any of you give to converse with Orpheus, and
Musæus, and Hesiod, and Homer? I would gladly die many times if this be
true; since to me it would be a delightful residence when I had met with
Palamedes, and the Telamonian Ajax, and any other of the ancients who
perished in consequence of an unjust judgment. To compare my own fate
with theirs, would not, I think, be disagreeable: and best of all, to
live examining and interrogating the people there, as I have done here,
to discover who among them are wise, and who think themselves so, but
are not. How much would not one give, O judges, for an opportunity of
examining him who led the great expedition to Troy; or Ulysses, or
Sysyphus, or ten thousand others whom one could mention, both men and
women; with whom to converse and associate there, and to examine them,
would be the height of happiness. They do not, there, put one to death
for such things; for the people there are happier than the people here,
both in other things, and in this, that when once there they are
immortal; if what we are told is true.

It behoves you, O judges, to be of good cheer concerning death; and to
fix this truth in your minds, that to a good man, whether he die or
live, nothing is evil, nor are his affairs neglected by the gods;
neither did what has happened to me occur spontaneously, but it is
evident to me that to die, and come to an end now, was most for my good.
For this reason was it that the sign did not interpose to check me; and
I do not much complain of my accusers, nor of those who condemned me.
Though they, indeed, accused and condemned me not with any such
intention, but purposing to do me harm: and for this it is fit to blame
them.

Thus much, however, I beg of them: When my sons grow up, punish them, O
Athenians, by tormenting them as I tormented you, if they shall seem to
study riches, or any other ends, in preference to virtue. And if they
are thought to be something, being really nothing, reproach them as I
have reproached you, for not attending to what they ought, and fancying
themselves Edition: current; Page: [174] something when they are good
for nothing. And if you do this, both I and my sons shall have received
what is just at your hands.

It is now time that we depart, I to die, you to live; but which has the
better destiny is unknown to all, except the god.

Edition: current; Page: [a]
[lf0223-11_figure_001.jpg]
The first folio of the MS of “Notes on the Charmides of Plato” Berg
Collection, New York Public Library

Edition: current; Page: [175]


The Charmides

[Holograph MS, Berg Collection, New York Public Library, entitled “Notes
on the Charmides of Plato.” Paper watermarked 1828. Not mentioned in
JSM’s bibliography. For details concerning the manuscript and the
transcription, see the Textual Introduction, lxxxi-lxxxii above; for a
discussion of this and the other translations of Plato, see also the
Introduction, xvii-xxviii above.]

the subject of this dialogue is σωϕροσύνη, which includes the two ideas
of prudence and temperance, with a sort of etymological reference to
thought, and good sense,* and may perhaps in general be best translated
by the word considerateness, as when we speak of considerate conduct,
and a considerate character or disposition. To the purposes however of
the present dialogue, the words good sense seem better adapted.†

The interlocutors are Socrates, Critias (afterwards the head of the
Thirty Tyrants, though long a disciple of Socrates) and a young man
named Charmides, who appears to have been celebrated for his personal
beauty, the effect of which upon the bystanders and even upon Socrates
himself, that philosopher (who is the narrator of the conversation)
describes in terms which to our modern ideas appear singularly
high-flown.

Socrates seeing, at the Taurean palæstra, the exceeding beauty of this
young man, & being told by his cousin & guardian, Critias, that he was
equally excellent in mind, expressed a desire to converse with him.
Critias offered to bring this about, & called upon Charmides to
approach, pretending to have found a physician who could cure him of a
headach which he had complained of. Socrates, being asked whether he was
this physician, pretended that he was, and that his remedy was a certain
herb, but that its Edition: current; Page: [176] efficacy depended upon
its being used together with a particular incantation: the power of
which was not confined to the head, but gave health to the whole man.
“You must have heard,” he continued, “from good physicians, that if a
man comes to them with diseased eyes, they cannot cure the eyes
separately, but in order to remedy the complaint of the eyes they must
make applications to the whole body. It is the same with respect to this
incantation. I was taught it by some Thracian physicians, whose power is
said to extend even to conferring immortality. They told me, that the
Grecian physicians were right in that maxim of theirs, which I just
mentioned, but the Thracian god Zalmoxis had taught, that as the eyes
could not be cured without the head nor the head without the body, so
neither can the body without the mind, & that the reason why most
diseases prove too strong for the Greek physicians, is, that they
attempt to treat one part of the human being, being unacquainted with
the nature of the whole. All good & all evil come originally from the
mind, & that must be in a proper state before the condition of any other
part of the system can be rectified. But the appliances which keep the
mind in a proper state, are of the nature of incantation, to wit,
Doctrine, Discussion, Argument. By these, σωϕροσύνη, or good sense, is
generated, & where that exists, it is easy to procure health for the
body. This physician, therefore,” added Socrates, “who taught me the
remedy for headach, made me swear solemnly never to suffer any one to
prevail upon me to apply it to his head unless he will first allow me to
apply the incantation to his mind. If therefore you, Charmides, will
first place your mind under my care that I may administer the
incantation, I will apply the remedy to your head; if not, I can do
nothing for you.”

Critias observed, that the headach which Charmides was afflicted with,
would be an excellent thing for him if it forced him to improve his
mental health also for the sake of the bodily: that however he already
excelled his contemporaries not less in this very quality of good sense
than in personal beauty. “If so,” said Socrates, “he has no occasion for
the incantation, & we may proceed at once to administer the remedy for
headach: but if he is still deficient in σωϕροσύνη, we must begin with
the incantation.” He therefore asked Charmides whether he deemed himself
to possess a sufficiency of this quality or not. Charmides not liking
either to say that he did, or to admit that he did not, Socrates
proposed a mode of examining him, so as to ascertain the point.

“If,” said he, “you possess good sense, you must have some opinion on
the subject of it. For if this quality is in you, it must make its
existence perceptible in some manner, from which you must be enabled to
form some opinion, what, & what kind of thing it is.”—“Certainly,”
answered Charmides.—“Can you then tell what in your opinion it
is?”—Charmides, after some hesitation, answered, that he thought it
consisted in doing every Edition: current; Page: [177] thing in an
orderly and quiet manner, as for instance, walking quietly, & talking
quietly, and so forth. In short, it seemed to him he said to be a
certain tranquillity. The idea which he seemed to wish to express, was
that of a kind of external decency, & personal reserve.

Socrates proceeded to catechize him further, asking him whether he did
not consider good sense to be an admirable thing?—“Certainly,” replied
he.—“Whether, now, in learning to write, is it more admirable to write
copies rapidly, or quietly?”—“Rapidly.”—“And to read, rapidly or
slowly?”—“Rapidly.”—“To play on the harp? To box, or wrestle? To run? To
learn? To teach? To recollect?” In all these operations, Charmides was
forced to admit, that quickness was more meritorious than slowness, or
tranquillity; and moreover in thinking, he admitted that sagacity
consisted in quickness & sharpness of mind, not slowness and
tranquillity: So again in deliberation, that the greater excellence was
in him who could deliberate quickest, not him who did it most slowly and
quietly. Good sense, therefore, did not consist in tranquillity, and it
was necessary that Charmides should consider again & give another
answer.

He answered, that good sense made men sensible to shame, & seemed to be
much the same thing with modesty. To this Socrates answered, by asking
him whether he did not admit that sense was a good quality?—“Yes.”—“And
do you not think that Homer is in the right, when he says, that it is
not good for a needy man to be ashamed?”[*]—“I do.”—“Then there is good
shame and bad shame.”—“Yes.”—“But sense is always good.”—“It is.”—“Then
sense is not the same thing with sensibility to shame.”

Charmides assented, & suggested another definition of sense which he had
just recollected to have heard, viz. that it consisted in confining
oneself to one’s own business.

Socrates compared this definition to a riddle; “for,” said he, “it
cannot have been meant in the literal sense of the words. Do you think
that a grammarian, or teacher of languages (γραμματιστής) in teaching
children to read & write their own or any other tongue, reads and writes
nothing but his own name, & taught you when you were a child to read &
write nothing but your own name? Did you not write the names of friends
& enemies indiscriminately?”—“We did.”—“Did you act contrary to good
sense in so doing?”—“No.”—“But you were not confining yourselves to your
own business.”—“True.”—“And to give medical attendance, to build, to
weave, in short to practise any art, is to transact some business, is it
not?”—“Yes.”—“But would a state be well administered if the law were,
that each man should weave & dye his own coat, & make his own shoes,
Edition: current; Page: [178] &c. and not meddle with other men’s
business?”—“No.”—“But if it were sensibly administered it must be well
administered.”—“Yes.”—“Then sense does not consist literally in
confining oneself to one’s own business.”—“So it seems.”—“Then the
person who gave you this definition, meant it, as I said before, as a
riddle: or was he some very silly person?”—“No,” answered Charmides, “he
was a very wise person.”—“Then it must have been meant as a riddle,
because it was difficult to guess what was meant by confining oneself to
one’s own business. Can you tell what it is?”—“No,” answered Charmides,
“nor perhaps could the author himself,” looking at Critias, & smiling.

Critias, who was evidently the person meant, though he had disclaimed
it, interposed in behalf of the definition, and said, that he did not
consider these handicraft occupations to be entitled to the name of
business. “For Hesiod,” said he, “declares, that business is no
disgrace.[*] Do you think he meant that shoemaking & sausageselling*
were no disgrace? Work is a different thing from business: Work may be a
reproach, but that only is business which is noble and useful. This
therefore ought to be considered one’s own business; & all mischievous
things, should be considered as foreign to us. In this signification,
Hesiod & other wise men thought that the sensible man is he who confines
himself to his own business.”

“I thought from the first,” answered Socrates, “that by one’s own, you
meant all good things and by business all good works. I have heard
Prodicus make a hundred such verbal distinctions. But you may impose
names in whatever way you please, only let us know to what thing, each
of your names is applied. Let us begin again from the beginning. Sense,
you say, is the doing of good things.”—“Yes.”—“He who does evil then is
not sensible, you think?”—“And do not you?”—“The question is not what I
think, but what you say.”—“I say, that he who does good & avoids evil is
sensible, he who does evil & not good, is not sensible, & I am willing
to define sense, as the doing of what is good.”—“May be so. But I am
surprised if you think that men may be sensible without knowing that
they are so.”—“But I do not think so.”—“Do you not think that a
physician, in curing a sick man, does what is beneficial both to himself
& to the person cured?”—“Yes.”—“Then he does what is right.”—“But he who
does what is right, is sensible.”—“Yes.”—“Now, must a physician
necessarily know, whether he has done a benefit by curing or not? And in
general, must any workman know, as a matter of course, whether the work
he has accomplished will or will not turn out beneficial to
himself?”—“Perhaps Edition: current; Page: [179] not.”—“Then a physician
may sometimes act beneficially or detrimentally, without knowing that he
has done so, & may therefore, by your definition, be sensible without
knowing it.”

“This,” answered Critias, “is impossible: & if any of my former
admissions leads necessarily to this, I had rather retract the
admission, than allow that a person may be sensible, not knowing
himself. For I think that good sense chiefly consists in self-knowledge,
& that the celebrated inscription at Delphi, Know thyself, was intended
as a salution from the God, not according to the usual form, Rejoice,
but equivalent to this, Be sensible, being a more proper exhortation on
meeting, than to rejoice. I will therefore give up all that has been
said, in which perhaps you were right, & perhaps I, though neither of us
said any thing very clear. But I am now ready to maintain if you deny it
that good sense is, to know ourselves.”

Socrates told Critias that he was not to consider him as knowing any
thing about the matter, so as either to deny or admit, but that he was
ready to join in enquiring into it.

“You say that good sense is to know oneself. Now if it is to know, it is
a sort of knowledge.”—“Yes.”—“The knowledge of something.”—“Yes, of
oneself.”—“Medicine is the knowledge of what is conducive to health, is
it not?”—“Yes.”—“If you were to ask me, what was the use of medicine, or
the knowledge of what conduces to health, & what effect it produces, I
should answer, It is of great use, for it produces an admirable thing,
viz. health.”—“Yes.”—“And if you asked me what is the effect produced by
Architecture, or the knowledge of building, I should answer, Edifices; &
so forth. Now you ought to be able to tell me, what is the excellent
effect produced by good sense, which you say, is the knowledge of
oneself.”

“This,” replied Critias, “is not a right question. For good sense is not
like other branches of knowledge, nor are they like each other; but you
interrogate as if they were. Can you shew any effect produced by
arithmetic, or geometry, or many other arts, in the manner in which
cloth is produced by weaving, or houses by architecture? You
cannot.”—“True. But I can shew you in each of these branches of
knowledge, something, different from the knowledge itself, something
which is the subject of the knowledge, something which it is the
knowledge of. For instance, arithmetic is the knowledge of number, which
is not the same thing with arithmetic: Statics, is the knowledge of the
specific gravities of bodies, which are a different thing from Statics
itself.”—“True.”—“What, then, is Good Sense the knowledge of, different
from Good Sense itself?”

“You mistake again,” answered Critias, “in the same way: You have hit
upon the very point which distinguishes good sense from all other kinds
of knowledge, & you are looking for a resemblance between them. All
other kinds of knowledge, are knowledge of other things, but not of
themselves: Edition: current; Page: [180] Good Sense, is a knowledge
likewise of itself. And you know this well, but you are doing what you
just now disclaimed, you are attempting to refute me, not regarding the
subject itself.”—“You are wrong,” answered Socrates, “in supposing that
even if I do refute you, I do so on any other account than that which
would induce me, in a similar case, to enquire into the grounds of my
own notions, that I might not fancy that I knew the subject when I did
not. And I am now enquiring into this subject, chiefly for my own sake,
next perhaps for that of my friends. Do you not think it a common
advantage to all men, that the nature of all things should be explained
& cleared up?”—“Extremely so.”—“Answer, then, & do not mind whether you
or I be refuted, but attend to the argument & see whether that can be
refuted & what is the consequence if it be.”—“I will do so, for what you
say appears reasonable.”—“Tell me, then, what you say with respect to
Good Sense?”

“I say,” answered Critias, “that it alone of all kinds of knowledge, is
knowledge of itself & of the other kinds of knowledge.”—“Then if it be a
knowledge of knowledge, it is likewise a knowledge of
ignorance?”—“Yes.”—“Then, the sensible man alone will know himself, &
will be able to distinguish, what he knows & what he does not know; and
likewise, he & no other will be able to judge of other men, what they
know, & what they fancy they know when they really do not. And Good
Sense & self-knowledge consist in knowing what we know & what we are
ignorant of. Is this your meaning?”—“Yes.”—“Let us then first enquire,
whether it be a possible thing or not, to know what we know & what we
are ignorant of: & next, if it be possible, what would be the use of it
to us.”—“Certainly.”—“I, then,” said Socrates, “am puzzled. Is this
knowledge, of which you are speaking, the knowledge of nothing whatever
but of itself & of other kinds of knowledge, & of
ignorance?”—“Certainly.”—“This is very paradoxical: for if you make the
same supposition in other things, it will appear to you
impossible.”—“How?”—“Do you think, that there is a faculty of sight,
which is not the sight of any visible object, but of itself & other
faculties of sight & of non-sight, & which does not see any colour, but
sees itself & other seeing faculties?”—“Certainly not.”—“Or is there any
hearing faculty, which hears, not any sound, but only itself & other
hearing faculties?”—“No.”—“Or any desire, which desires, not any
pleasure, but itself & other pleasures?”—“No.”—“Or any will, which
wills, not any good, but itself & other wills?”—“No.”—“Or any love,
which loves, not any lovely object, but itself & other loves?”—“No.”—“Or
any fear, which fears itself & other fears, but does not fear any
danger?”—“No.”—“Or any thinking faculty, which thinks itself & other
thinking faculties, but does not think any particular
thought?”—“No.”—“But there is a Knowledge which is not the knowledge of
any Acquirement, but of itself & other Edition: current; Page: [181]
knowledges.”—“There is.”—“Is not this paradoxical? Let us not however
for that reason pronounce it untrue, but enquire whether it is true or
no.”

“This knowledge is the knowledge of something.”—“Yes.”—“That which is
larger, too, must be larger than something.”—“Yes.”—“Than something
smaller.”—“Undoubtedly.”—“Then if we could find any larger thing, which
is larger than itself & other larger things, but is not larger than
those things than which other things are larger, would not this thing if
it be larger, be also smaller, than itself?”—“Of necessity.”—“And if
there be any thing, which is double of all other doubles & of itself, it
must likewise be half of itself: for whatever is double, is the double
of a half. And what is more than itself, must be less than itself, what
is heavier must be lighter; what is older, must be younger, &c.; in
short, whatever is itself the object to which its distinguishing quality
is referred, must likewise have in itself the opposite & correlative
quality or object. For instance, hearing, is always relative to a
voice.”—“It is.”—“Then if hearing hears itself, it hears itself hearing
a voice.”—“Yes.”—“And if sight sees itself, sight must have some colour:
for that which has no colour cannot be seen.”—“Certainly.”—“In the case
of some of the things, therefore, which we have supposed to be their own
objects, or correlatives, the supposition is clearly impossible; & in
the remainder it appears extremely unlikely. We need, therefore, a man
equal to the task of deciding, whether there is nothing which is capable
of being the object to which its own distinguishing property is
relative; or whether some things are capable & others not; & if some
things are capable, whether knowledge is one of them, which, in that
case, we have termed Good Sense. I do not esteem myself to be equal to
this task. And I can neither affirm there may be a Knowledge of
knowledge, nor if there is, can I admit that it is the same thing with
Good Sense, until I have examined whether a knowledge of this sort would
benefit us or not. For I conceive Good Sense to be something noble &
beneficial. Do you therefore shew, first, that there can be a Knowledge
of knowledge & of ignorance, next that besides being possible, it is
likewise useful.”

Critias being puzzled & talking obscurely to hide his embarrassment,
Socrates proposed that they should for the sake of the argument, allow
that such a thing as Knowledge of knowledge may exist. “Supposing this
to be possible, how would it enable a man the more to know what things
he knows and what he is ignorant of? For we said that in this consists
Self-knowledge, and good sense.”—“Surely,” answered Critias. “If a man
has that knowledge which knows itself, he becomes such as this
knowledge, which he has. When a man has swiftness, he is swift; when he
has beauty, he is beautiful; when he has knowledge, he is knowing. When
therefore he has that knowledge which is knowledge of itself, he comes
to know himself.”—“I do not doubt that: When he has that which is
self-knowing, Edition: current; Page: [182] he will know himself: But
will he therefore know what things he knows & of what he is
ignorant?”—“That is the same thing.”—“Perhaps: but I am just as I was
before, still puzzled: for I do not understand, that to know what things
we know, is the same as to know of what we are ignorant.”—“What do you
mean?”—“I mean this. Will the knowledge of knowledge, be capable of any
thing more than to distinguish that this is knowledge & that is not
knowledge?”—“Nothing else.”—“And is the knowledge & ignorance of the
Salubrious, the same as the knowledge & ignorance of the
Just?”—“No.”—“The one is Medicine, the other Politics, but we are
speaking only of Knowledge. Now we must suppose a person who does not
know the Salubrious, nor the Just, but only knows Knowledge. This person
will be able to discern, whether or not he knows something, & has some
knowledge, and the same of any one else.”—“Yes.”—“But how can he, merely
by this knowledge, distinguish what it is which he knows? For the
Salubrious is to be known not by good sense, but by Medicine, the
Harmonious, not by good sense but by Music; the Architectural, not by
good sense but by Architecture.”—“So it seems.”—“If therefore good sense
be only the Knowledge of knowledge, how can he by means of it, know that
he knows the Salubrious, or the Architectural?”—“Not at all.”—“Then he
who is ignorant of these separate sciences will not know what he knows,
but only that he knows something.”—“So it appears.”—“Then good sense
does not consist in knowing what things he knows & does not know, but
only in knowing that he does know or does not know.”—“It would seem
so.”—“Neither then will he be able to put to the test any other man who
asserts that he knows something, & distinguish whether he really knows
what he says he knows, or not: He will only know, that the man has some
knowledge, but Good Sense will not enable him to know of
what.”—“Allowed.”—“Then he will not be able to distinguish a real from a
pretended physician, & so on. This may be seen from the following
circumstance. If a sensible man, or any other man, wishes to distinguish
a real from a sham physician, what will he do?—He will not enter into
conversation with him on the subject of Medicine; for the physician
understands only the Salubrious & the Insalubrious: he knows nothing
about Knowledge; that we have assigned to good sense alone.”—“We
have.”—“But Medicine is Knowledge; therefore the physician knows nothing
on the subject of Medicine.”—“True.”—“The sensible man will therefore
know, that the physician has some knowledge; but if he wishes to try
what knowledge, will he not enquire, What things it is the knowledge of?
Do we not after having ascertained that what is in question is some
Knowledge, ascertain what knowledge by asking what is it the knowledge
of?”—“Yes.”—“Medicine is distinguished from other kinds of knowledge, by
its being the knowledge of the Salubrious & the Edition: current; Page:
[183] Insalubrious.”—“It is.”—“Then he who wishes to examine Medicine,
must examine it in these things, in which it exists, not in those in
which it does not exist.”—“True.”—“Then he who wishes to examine the
physician, must examine him in the Salubrious and the Insalubrious.”—“So
it seems.”—“And he examines him in order to try whether what he says on
these subjects is true, & what he does, proper?”—“Certainly.”—“Can he do
this, but by means of Medicine?”—“No.”—“Nobody then but the Physician
can do it; not the sensible man; for he would need to be a Physician
into the bargain.”—“Yes.”—“If, then, Good Sense is the knowledge only of
Knowledge and Ignorance, it cannot distinguish a real from a pretended
physician, nor the man who really knows any other thing, from a
pretender, except those of one’s own art, whom, of course, all artists
can distinguish.”—“So it appears.”—“What, then, is the use of good
sense, thus defined? For if, as we at first supposed, the sensible man
knew that he knows what he really does know, & that he knows not, what
he really does not know, it would be a great advantage to be sensible:
for we, & all over whom we had influence, would lead an unerring life:
we should never attempt what we knew not how to do, but would find out
those who knew, & entrust it to them; nor should we ever permit those
whom we could influence, to do any thing but what they could do well,
i.e., what they had the knowledge of. A family or a state, or any thing
else which was governed by this sort of Good Sense, would be well
governed, for every thing in it would be well done, & those who do all
things well are happy. These were the effects which we expected from
Good Sense, when we thought that it was the knowledge of what we know &
know not.”—“Yes.”—“But it now appears that no such knowledge
exists.”—“It does.”—“Perhaps, the use of this Good Sense, which is the
knowledge of Knowledge & of Ignorance, is only, that he who possesses it
is enabled to learn every thing else more easily, & that every thing
appears more clearly to him, in as much as, besides the particular thing
which he learns, he perceives his knowledge of it likewise. And he will
be better able to judge of other men’s knowledge of those particular
things which he also has learnt, than those who merely know the
particular thing without knowing the knowledge. Is this the advantage
which is to be derived from good sense, & have we been looking out for
some thing greater than is really to be found?”—“Perhaps it may be so.”

“Perhaps it may,” resumed Socrates: “but perhaps we are wrong
altogether. I judge by something extremely strange which occurs to me,
respecting good sense, if it is what we now affirm it to be. Let us, if
you will grant that it is possible to know knowledge, & that the
knowledge of knowledge, would enable us as we supposed at first, to know
what things we know & do not know. Granting the possibility of all this,
let us enquire Edition: current; Page: [184] whether it would be of any
utility. For I think that we were wrong in admitting that sense, if it
consisted in this, would be a great good.”—“How?”—“It was a rash
admission, that mankind would be greatly benefitted if each man were to
perform only what he knows, & to resign what he knows not, to others who
know it.”—“Is not this right?”—“I think not.”—“This is strange
indeed.”—“So it seems to me. But I think, that if good sense consists in
this, it is not clear that it does us any good whatever.”—“Let us hear
what you have to say.”—“I dare say that I am wrong; but nevertheless if
we have any regard for ourselves, we must examine the thoughts which
occur to us, & not carelessly pass them by.”—“True.”—“If good sense,
such as we have defined it, governed our actions, every thing would be
done according to knowledge, & no sham pilot, or physician or general,
pretending to know what he did not, would deceive us. Our bodies would
be more healthy than now, we should be exposed to fewer dangers at sea &
in war, & all our furniture, clothes, & effects would be constructed by
good workmen. If you think fit, we will add a prophetic knowledge of the
future, and Good Sense shall be supposed to reject all imposters &
induce us to give our confidence to genuine soothsayers & prophets. That
the human race, thus directed, would live according to knowledge, I
allow: for Good Sense, would not suffer Ignorance to intrude itself. But
that, acting according to knowledge, we should act well & be happy, I
cannot yet understand.”—“But you will not easily find any other
characteristic of acting well, except acting according to
knowledge.”—“Instruct me then a little farther. According to what
knowledge? The knowledge of shoemaking?”—“Certainly not.”—“Of working in
brass?”—“No.”—“In wool, or in timber, & so forth?”—“No.”—“Then we give
up the doctrine, that he is happy who lives according to knowledge: for
it seems that there may be people living according to knowledge whom you
do not call happy. Your happy man, it seems, must live according to the
knowledge of some particular subject. Perhaps you mean, the man I
mentioned before, who knows the future, the prophet. Do you mean him, or
somebody else?”—“Both him & somebody else.”—“Whom? Do you mean, him who
besides the future, should know all the past & the present, & be
ignorant of nothing? You cannot say that there is any person more
knowing than he.”—“Certainly not.”—“I desire, then, to know, what branch
of knowledge it is, which makes him happy? All equally?”—“Not
equally.”—“Which does it most? Of what past, present, & future things is
it the knowledge? Of chess-playing?”—“No.”—“Of number?”—“No.”—“Of the
Salubrious?”—“More so.”—“And what most of all?”—“Of Good & Evil.”—“See
how you have been drawing me round in a circle, disguising from me that
what makes us act well & be happy, is not to live according to
Knowledge, though it were the knowledge of all other things, but only
Edition: current; Page: [185] according to the single knowledge of Good
& Evil. For, take this away, & Medicine will still give us health,
Shoemaking, shoes, Weaving, garments. Navigation will save us from
drowning, & Generalship will protect us in war. But to accomplish these
things well & beneficially, will be wanting.”—“True.”—“Good sense,
therefore is not what we said it was; it is that which would be
beneficial. It is not the knowledge of knowledge & ignorance, but the
knowledge of good & evil.”—“But would not the former be beneficial? For,
suppose that Good Sense is the knowledge of knowledges: it would thus
survey & rule over all other knowledges, & among others the knowledge of
good & evil, & would therefore benefit us.”—“Pray would it give us
health, or would that be the result only of medicine? Would it produce
all those things, which are the result of the other arts? or would that
be reserved for those arts themselves? Did we not admit, that Good Sense
is the knowledge solely of knowledge & ignorance, not of any thing
else?”—“True.”—“Then it would not give us health.”—“No.”—“That belongs
to another art.”—“Yes.”—“Neither then, would it give us Good: for that
we have assigned to a different art.”—“We have.”—“How then can Sense be
useful, since it does not cause us any good?”—“Not at all, it would
seem.”

“You see, then,” added Socrates, “that, as I feared, we are quite wrong,
or we never should have come to the conclusion that what is acknowledged
to be the noblest of all qualities is useless. We are therefore
defeated, & cannot discover to what existing thing the name, Good Sense,
was given by its inventor. And yet, we have made many admissions, which
the argument did not compel us to. We admitted, that there may be a
knowledge of knowledge, though the argument made against it; & we
admitted that this knowledge would know the things, which are the
subjects of the other kinds of knowledge (tho’ the argument would not
allow this either) in order that a sensible man might know what things
he knows, & of what he is ignorant. This we admitted, not considering
the contradiction of supposing, that what a man is ignorant of, he
nevertheless in some sort knows, since he knows himself to be ignorant
of it. But with all this readiness of concession we could not discover
the truth, but continued to give the name of Good Sense to something
which turned out to be useless. I do not mind this so much for myself,
but I am vexed on account of you, Charmides, if having not only so much
beauty but extraordinary good sense, you will be never the better for
it, nor will be in any way benefitted by it in your life: And I am vexed
on account of the incantation which the Thracian taught me, that I
learned with much trouble a thing which is good for nothing. I cannot
believe that this is so, but rather conclude, that I am an unskilful
enquirer, that Good Sense is in reality a great good, & that if you
possess it you are fortunate. But see whether you have it, & do not
require the incantation: Edition: current; Page: [186] for if you have
it, I would advise you to think me a trifler & unable to investigate any
thing, but to think yourself the more sensible you are, by so much the
happier.”

Charmides answered, “I do not know whether I have it or not: how can I,
since even you two are not able to discover what it is? But for all
that, I am not persuaded by you; I think myself to have much need of the
incantation, & I have no objection to have it administered by you as
often as you please.”—“It will,” said Critias, “be to me a proof of your
Good Sense, if you do allow Socrates to administer it, without
intermission.”—“It would be very wrong,” answered Charmides, “if I did
not obey you, who are my guardian.” And the dialogue ends with some
lively conversation between Socrates & the other two, at the conclusion
of which Socrates consents to do what they require.

This dialogue, therefore, like the Laches, terminates without any
definite result, & can only be considered, like so many other works of
Plato, to be a mere dialectical exercise, in which various ideas are
thrown out, but no opinion definitely adhered to or maintained.

Edition: current; Page: [188]


The Euthyphron

[Holograph MS, Berg Collection, New York Public Library, entitled “Notes
on the Euthyphron of Plato.” Paper watermarked 1828. Not mentioned in
JSM’s bibliography. For details concerning the manuscript and the
transcription, see the Textual Introduction, lxxxi-lxxxii above; for a
discussion of this and the other translations of Plato, see also the
Introduction, xvii-xxviii above.]

the subject of this dialogue is Piety. Like the Laches & the Charmides,
it belongs to the class to which the epithet πειραστικός has been added;
to express that its sole object is to make an adversary expose himself,
& to refute false notions, without establishing true ones.

Euthyphron, who seems to have been a prophet, or diviner, & theologian,
by profession, meets Socrates returning from one of the courts of
justice, and expresses his surprise at finding him in a situation so
unusual with him. “Have you a suit before the Archon,” (he asks) “as I
have?”—“They do not call it a suit,” replied Socrates, “but an
indictment.”—“What! Has any person indicted you? for I am certain that
you have not indicted any person.”—Socrates assented.—“Who is your
accuser?”—Socrates answered that he was named Melitus: he did not know
much about him; he seemed young & obscure; & describing his person,
asked Euthyphron if he knew him. Euthyphron said he did not. “But what
charge has he brought against you?”—“No mean one,” answered Socrates.
“For it is no bad sign of a young man to be conversant with so great a
matter. He, it seems, knows in what manner the youth are corrupted, &
who they are that corrupt them. And he will prove, no doubt, to be some
sage, who, perceiving my errors, by which I corrupt those who are his
equals in years, comes & accuses me before the state, as our common
mother. And he alone appears to me to commence politics at the right
end: for the right way is to look after the young men first, as a good
husbandman first takes care of the young plants, & afterwards of the
others. And Melitus probably has a mind to begin by clearing away us who
destroy the young shoots of society, as he says; after that it is clear
that he will take care of the old men, & will be the casue of great good
to the state, as may be presumed from so happy a Edition: current; Page:
[188] commencement.” Euthyphron answered, that from such a commencement
he should rather fear that Melitus would continue all his life to do
evil to the state. “But by what means does he say that you corrupt the
youth?”—“It is strange to hear. For he says that I am a fabricator of
gods, & indicts me for making new gods, & not recognizing the old.”—“I
understand; it is because of what you say about your supernatural
warnings. He therefore indicts you as innovating in religion, knowing
that such charges find a ready belief. And I too, when I speak in the
assembly on religious matters, foretelling the future, am laughed at as
a madman. And yet all my predictions have come true. But they envy all
of us who know these matters. We must not mind them, but pursue our
course.”—“It is no great matter,” answered Socrates, “to be laughed at.
The Athenians, as it seems to me, do not greatly mind if they think a
man clever, provided he does not propagate his wisdom: but those who
they think are not only wise themselves but make others so, they are
angry with, be it from envy, as you say, or from some other cause.”—“I
have no great mind to try what are their sentiments of me in this
respect.”—“Perhaps you are thought to hold yourself scarce, & to be
unwilling to communicate your wisdom: but I am afraid that I, from
philanthropy, am thought by them to say to every body without reserve
whatever I have in me, not only without being paid, but being glad even
to pay others for hearing me, if it were required. If, now, they were
only to laugh at me, as you say they do at you, it would not be
unpleasant to pass some time in laughter & fun before the court; but if
they are serious, nobody knows what will be the issue, except you, who
are prophets.”—“Perhaps, after all, it will come to nothing, & you will
come off to your satisfaction, as I think I shall.”—Socrates hereupon
asked Euthyphron what was the suit in which he was engaged. Euthyphron
explained, that he was prosecuting his own father, for homicide.
Socrates expressed surprise, & said, that he supposed the murdered
person was a near relation of Euthyphron, since he would not have
prosecuted him for the murder of a stranger.—“What difference does it
make,” answered Euthryphron, “whether he was a stranger or a relation?
The only question is, whether he was justly killed or not, although his
slayer should be united to you by the closest ties; for the pollution,
if you associate knowingly with such a person, & do not purify yourself
& him by bringing him to justice, is just the same. The slain person was
a bailiff of mine at Naxos, who in a fit of intoxication killed one of
our slaves. My father put him in irons & in a dungeon, & sent hither to
enquire of the ἐξηγητής* what he ought to do. In the meantime the man
died from the effects of confinement & neglect. Now my father & my
relations are indignant because I prosecute my father for Edition:
current; Page: [189] the death of this homicide: saying that he did not
put him to death, & that if he did it was no justification, for it is
impious in a son to indict his father of murder. They do not know
correctly the doctrine of religion on the subject of piety and
impiety.”—“And do you, Euthyphron, in the name of Jupiter, understand
religion, & piety & impiety so well, that in the circumstances you have
mentioned, you are not afraid to prosecute your father, lest you should
be committing an impious action?”—“I should be nobody, & should have no
claim to superiority over other men, if I did not know all these things
accurately.”—“It would be for my good, most excellent Euthyphron, to
become a disciple of yours, & before my trial comes on, to represent to
Melitus, that I have always set a high value on religious knowledge, &
now, since he says that I have erred when I promulgated my own notions &
attempted to innovate in religion, I have become your pupil. And I will
say to him, If you admit that Euthyphron is wise & sound in these
matters, think the same of me, & do not prosecute me: but if not, indict
my master first, as a corrupter of the old men, viz. me, & his own
father, myself by his instructions, his father by admonition &
punishment. And if this does not prevail upon him to drop the
prosecution or to indict you instead of me, I will say the same thing
before my judges.”—“Aye,” said Euthyphron, “if he makes any attempt upon
me, I will find out his weak side, & the court shall have more to say
about him, than about me.”—“This is the reason,” replied Socrates, “why
I wish to become your disciple, knowing that Melitus & others do not
seem to take notice of you, but he sees me so clearly that he has
indicted me for impiety. Now, then, pray expound to me what you said
that you clearly understand: what piety & impiety consist in, both in
respect to homicide & to every thing else. Is not piety one & the same
thing in all the different acts which receive that name, & impiety,
again, the contrary of piety, but in itself always one & the same thing?
Is there not one single idea which belongs to every thing which is
impious, in so far as it is impious?”*—“Certainly.”—“Tell us then, what
you mean by the Pious, & the Impious.”

“The pious,” answered Euthyphron, “is what I am now doing, to prosecute
those who are guilty either of homicide, or spoliation of temples, or
any thing of that sort; whether the offender be your father or your
mother, or any person whatever: And not to prosecute him, is impious.
And see what a great proof I will give you that this is the case. It is
believed by men that Jupiter, the best & justest of the Gods, put his
father Saturn in confinement because he unjustly devoured his children;
& that Saturn himself mutilated his own father, for a similar reason.
And yet they are Edition: current; Page: [190] angry with me for
prosecuting my father when he commits a crime. They are therefore
inconsistent with themselves.”

“The very reason,” answered Socrates, “why I am indicted is, because
when any one tells me these stories about the Gods, I find it difficult
to credit them. But now, if you who know all about these matters, are of
this opinion, I must of necessity assent: for what can I say, who myself
admit that I know nothing of the matter? But tell me, in the name of
friendship: Do you really believe that these things happened?”—“And many
things still more surprising, of which the vulgar are ignorant.”—“And
you really think that there are wars, & mutual enmities & battles among
the Gods, as poets say & painters represent to us?”—“Not only so, but I
will relate to you if you please many other things on the subject of
religion, which I am sure will astonish you.”—“I should not wonder. But
you will tell me all this another time. At present, try to explain more
distinctly what I have already asked you. For when I asked, what Piety
is, you did not give me an adequate answer, but told me that what you
are now doing, prosecuting your father, is pious.”—“And I said
truly.”—“Perhaps. But you say, that many other things likewise are
pious.”—“True.”—“You remember, then, that I did not ask you to tell me
one or two of the numerous things which are pious, but to tell me the
single Idea, by which all pious things are pious. For you said, that
impious things are impious, & pious things pious, by one common
character of piety or impiety.”—“I did.”—“Explain to me, then, this
general Idea, in order that, keeping it in mind, & using it as an
archetype, I may call those things pious which agree with it & those not
pious, which do not agree.”

Euthyphron, being thus pressed, made answer that what is pleasing to the
Gods is pious, what is not pleasing to them, impious. Socrates commended
this mode of answering, which he said, conformed to his intention in
putting the question; & proposed to examine whether the answer was true.

“You say, that the things, & the men, that are pleasing to the Gods, are
pious; those that are hateful to them, are impious: the pious, & the
impious, not being the same thing, but directly contrary.”—“True.”—“And
you said, that the Gods differ & dispute, & are at enmity among
themselves.”—“I did.”—“Now, what differences are they which produce
enmity & anger? For example: If you & I should differ on the subject of
number, which was the greater of two numbers, would this difference make
us enemies, and offended with each other? Or should we soon get rid of
our difference by coming to a calculation?”—“We should.”—“And if we
differed about the comparative size of two objects, we should soon
settle our difference by measuring.”—“Yes.”—“And if we differed about
the comparative weight of two bodies, we should come to a decision by
Edition: current; Page: [191] weighing.”—“Certainly.”—“On what subject
differing, & to what decision being unable to come, should we quarrel, &
become enemies? Perhaps you cannot at once say. Do you not think, that
the Just & Unjust, the Noble & Vile, the Good & Evil, are the subjects
on which when men differ, being unable to come to a satisfactory
decision of the dispute, they are apt to become enemies?”—“Agreed.”—“If
the Gods, then, ever differ, it must be on these subjects.”—“It
must.”—“By your account, then, some of the Gods differ from others in
what they consider just, and unjust, good & evil, noble & vile: for if
they did not differ on these subjects, they would never
quarrel.”—“True.”—“But each of them is pleased with what he thinks just,
good, & noble, and hates the contrary.”—“Yes.”—“What some of them think
just, others think unjust.”—“True.”—“Then, the very same things are both
loved & hated by Gods; the same things are at once pleasing to the Gods,
& hateful to them.”—“So it seems.”—“By this account, then, the same
things are both pious & impious.”—“It would appear so.”—“You did not,
therefore, answer my question. And it would not be wonderful if, in
acting as you now do, prosecuting your father, you were doing what is
pleasing to Jupiter, but hateful to Saturn & Uranus, & pleasing to
Vulcan, but hateful to Juno or some other.”

“But,” replied Euthyphron, “I do not think that the Gods differ from
each other on this point, that he who slays another unjustly ought to be
punished.”—“Did you ever hear any man contending that he who does
anything unjustly ought not to be punished?”—“They contend for it
incessantly, in the courts of justice & elsewhere: for committing all
sorts of injustice, they say & do every thing to escape punishment.”—“Do
they confess that they have committed injustice, & nevertheless declare
that they ought not to suffer punishment?”—“That, it is true they do
not.”—“Then they do not say & do every thing: for, it seems, they do not
venture to say, that if they have committed injustice they should not be
punished. They say that they have not committed
injustice.”—“True.”—“Then they do not dispute whether he who commits
injustice ought to be punished, but they perhaps dispute on the point,
who the man is who commits injustice, & what injustice consists
in.”—“True.”—“Then the Gods, likewise, if they dispute, as you say,
about the just & the unjust, & accuse each other of injustice, do not,
any of them, venture to affirm, that he who commits injustice ought not
to be punished; but they differ & dispute respecting the justice or
injustice of some particular act.”—“Certainly.”—“Teach me, then, in
order that I may become wiser, by what token you know that all the Gods
consider him to have died unjustly, who, being a labourer, & slaying a
man, is put in confinement by the master of the murdered man, & dies in
consequence of his confinement, before it can be ascertained from the
ἐξηγητής what ought to be done with him? & that they think it right for
a son Edition: current; Page: [192] to indict his father of murder on
such grounds?”—“It would perhaps require no little time; but I could
prove it to you very clearly.”—“I perceive that you think me a harder
scholar than the judges; since you will of course prove to them, that
the act is unjust, & odious to all the Gods.”—“Very clearly, if they
will listen to me.”—“But they will listen, if you appear to speak well.
It occurs to me, however, that if you were to make it ever so clear to
me that all the Gods think the death of this man unjust, I should not
have learnt from you the more, what Piety and Impiety are. I should only
know, that this act was hateful to the Gods. But this did not appear to
us an adequate definition of Impiety, for the same thing, it appeared,
was at once pleasing to the Gods, & hateful to the Gods: I excuse you
therefore, from this: & if you will, let all the Gods think this unjust,
& let all of them abhor it. But shall we correct our definition, & say,
that what all the Gods hate, is impious, what they all are pleased with,
is pious, what some of them are pleased with & others hate, is neither,
or both? Shall this be our definition of the pious, & the impious?”—“Why
should it not?”—“I have no objection; but do you consider whether you
will be most easily able to teach me what you promised, by this
supposition.”—“I should say, that the Pious is that which all the gods
are pleased with; & the contrary, that which they all hate, is
Impious.”—“Shall we examine, then, whether this is right, or shall we
take things upon our own authority or that of others, & believe whatever
is asserted?”—“We should examine. But I think that what we have now said
is correct.”

“Is the Pious pleasing to the Gods because it is pious, or is it pious
because it is pleasing to the Gods?”—“I do not understand you.”—“When a
thing is carried, is it carried because somebody carries it, or for some
other reason?”—“For this reason.”—“When a thing is driven, it is because
somebody drives it, & when seen, because somebody sees it.”—“Yes.”—“It
is not true that somebody sees it because it is seen; but, on the
contrary, it is seen because somebody sees it. Somebody does not carry
it because it is carried, but it is carried because somebody carries it.
In short, that which becomes any thing, or undergoes any thing, does not
become it or undergo it because it is becoming or undergoing, but it is
in the state, called becoming or undergoing, because it becomes or
undergoes.”—“True.”—“Now, to be loved, is either to become something or
to undergo something.”—“It is.”—“Then it is with this as with the other
things which we have mentioned. Somebody does not love a thing because
it is loved, but it is loved because somebody loves it.”—“Yes.”—“The
Pious, you say, is loved by all the Gods.”—“Yes.”—“Do they love it
because it is Pious, or for some other reason?”—“For that reason.”—“Then
it is not Pious because they love it but they love it because it is
Pious.”—“So it seems.”—“What is pleasing to the Gods, however, is
pleasing to them because they Edition: current; Page: [193] love
it.”—“Certainly.”—“Then Pious, & Pleasing to the Gods, are not the same
thing?”—“How?”—“Because we have admitted, that the Gods love the pious,
because it is pious; it is not pious because they love it. But they do
not love what is Pleasing to them because it is pleasing; on the
contrary it is called pleasing to them by reason of their loving
it.”—“True.”—“But if Pious, and Pleasing to the Gods, were identical,
then, if the Gods loved the Pious because it is Pious, they would have
loved what is Pleasing to them because it is Pleasing to them: Or if
what is Pleasing to the Gods, were pleasing to them because they love
it, the Pious would have been Pious because they loved it. But you see
that these two things are entirely different, & oppositely affected: the
one is what it is, because it is loved; the other is loved, because it
is what it is. And when I asked you what the Pious is, you seem not to
have been willing to explain to me its essence, but have told me one of
its attributes, which is, to be loved by all the Gods: what it is, you
have not told me. But by all means tell me now.”

Euthyphron complained that he could not express what he thought, since
whatever they laid down, always ran away from them, & would not remain
where they placed it. And after some lively conversation, in the usual
Socratic strain of irony, Socrates proposed to shew him in what manner
he ought to explain to him the nature of Piety. “Do you not think that
whatever is Pious, must necessarily be Just?”—“Yes.”—“And is every thing
which is Just, also Pious? Or is the Pious, universally Just, but the
Just not universally Pious, but part of it Pious, and part of it
something else?”—“I do not follow you.”—“And yet you are younger as well
as wiser than I: but you are lazy from abundance of wisdom. But pray
exert yourself: for it is not difficult to comprehend what I mean. I
mean the contrary of what the poet means, who says, ‘You will not speak
of Jove who created all things, for where there is fear, there is
awe.’[*] I differ from this Poet. It does not appear to me that where
there is fear, there is awe. For many persons fear diseases, & poverty,
& various other things, and stand in no awe of the things which they
fear. Do you not think so?”—“I do.”—“But where there is awe, there is
fear. For when a man is extremely overawed & ashamed, does he not stand
in fear of censure?”—“He does.”—“It is not right, then, to say, Where
there is fear there is awe; but, Where there is awe, there is fear. For
fear is more extensive than awe: Awe is part of fear, as Odd Numbers, of
Number in general: It cannot be said where there is Number there is
Odd-number, but where there is odd-number there is number.”—“Yes.”—“In
the same sense, I asked you, whether, where there is justice there is
piety, or whether, where there is piety, there is justice, but where
Edition: current; Page: [194] there is justice, there is not always
piety, but piety is a part of justice. Is it a part, think you?”—“I
think it is.”—“Let us proceed then to the next step. Since the Pious is
a part of the Just, we must next enquire, what part. If you asked me,
what part Even-number was of Number, I should answer, that which is
divisible into two equal parts. Should I not?”—“Yes.”—“Endeavour then to
explain to me in a similar manner, what part of the just, the pious
composes, that I may bid Melitus not to prosecute me further for
impiety, as having sufficiently learned from you what is & is not
pious.”

Euthyphron answered, “The Pious seems to me to be that part of the Just,
which relates to the service* of the Gods. The remaining part of the
Just, is that which regards the service of men.”

“You seem to me to say well,” resumed Socrates. “But I still desire
something more: I do not yet understand what service you mean. For you
do not mean a service with respect to the Gods, similar to the services
which relate to other things. As for example, we say, it is not every
one who can serve a horse properly, but only a
groom.”—“True.”—“Grooming, then, is the service of horses.”—“Yes.”—“And
it is not every one who can serve dogs properly, but only a
dog-keeper.”—“True.”—“Dog-training, then, is the service of dogs.”—“It
is.”—“And piety, of the Gods?”—“Yes.”—“But all service is for the same
end, viz. the good & advantage of that which is served: Horses, for
instance, are benefitted, & made better, by grooming.”—“They are.”—“And
dogs, by training, & so on. Or do you think that service is for the
injury of what is served?”—“Certainly not.”—“But for the
benefit.”—“Yes.”—“Is piety, then, which is the service of the Gods, for
the benefit of the Gods, & does it make them better? And do you grant,
that when you do a pious act, you make one of the Gods better than he
was before?”—“Certainly not.”—“Neither did I suppose you did. But what
kind of service of the Gods is piety?”—“That which servants render to
their masters.”—“I understand. It is a kind of working for
them.”†—“True.”—“Now can you tell, for the accomplishment of what effect
the physician’s kind of work is performed? Is it not for the
accomplishment of health?”—“It is.”—“And the shipbuilder’s kind of work,
for the accomplishment of what effect is it performed?”—“Of a
ship.”—“And the builder’s, of a house?”—“Yes.”—“Tell me then: for the
accomplishment of what effect does the kind of work which we called
working for the Gods, take place? You must know, since you say that you
are of all men the most versed in divine things.”—“And I say
true.”—“Tell me then, what is this Edition: current; Page: [195]
admirable effect which the Gods accomplish by employing us to work for
them?”—“Many & excellent things.”—“So do military commanders: but yet it
may all be summed up by saying that they accomplish victory in war. May
it not?”—“Yes.”—“And husbandmen, too, accomplish many and excellent
things: but nevertheless, the sum total of them is, the raising of food
from the earth.”—“True.”—“And what is the sum total of the many &
excellent things which the Gods accomplish?”—“I told you before, that it
would be a long piece of business to explain all these matters
accurately; but I will tell you simply, that if any person knows how to
say & do things pleasing to the Gods, by prayer & sacrifice, this is
pious, & is the salvation both of families & of states: the contrary is
impious, & destroys them.”—“You could have told me what I asked in much
fewer words if you had chosen: but you do not wish to instruct me; it is
clear: & now you have turned off when you were just at the point: If you
had answered perhaps by this time I should have learnt from you what
piety is. But now, since the questioner must follow wherever the
answerer chuses to lead, What do you define the Pious, & Piety to be? Is
it not, the knowledge how to sacrifice & to pray?”—“It is.”—“To
sacrifice is to make offerings to the Gods, to pray is to ask something
from them.”—“True.”—“Piety, by this account, is the knowledge of Asking
from the Gods, & giving to them.”—“You have understood me very
well.”—“For I am desirous of your wisdom, & attend to it, so that what
you say will not fall to the ground. You say that the service of the
Gods, consists in asking of them, & giving to them.”—“I do.”—“To ask of
them rightly, is to ask them for what we need from them.”—“Yes.”—“And to
give to them rightly, is to give them in return what they need from us.
For it would be an unskilful mode of bestowing gifts, to give to any one
what he has no occasion for.”—“You say true.”—“Then piety is, as it
were, an Art of Traffic between the Gods & men.”—“Of Traffic, if it
pleases you so to call it.”—“But it does not please me, if it is not
true. Tell me, then, what is the benefit arising to the Gods from the
gifts which they receive from us: As respects what they give, the case
is clear: for we have nothing good which we do not derive from them. But
what benefit do they receive from what we give them? Or have we so much
the best of this traffic, that we receive every thing that is good from
them & they nothing from us?”—“Do you think, Socrates, that the Gods are
benefitted by what we offer to them?”—“What do we offer it for?”—“What
do you suppose it is, except marks of honour & reverence, & what I said
before, things grateful to them?”—“The Pious, then, is something
grateful to the Gods, but not beneficial or pleasing.”—“In the highest
degree pleasing, I should think.”—“The Pious, then, is that which is
pleasing to the Gods.”—“It is.”—“Are you surprised, if the argument
should, as you said before, not stand still, but run away, when you
yourself appear to have Edition: current; Page: [196] made it run round
in a circle? Do you not see that we have returned again to the same
point? Do you not remember that Pious, & Pleasing to the Gods, appeared
to us to be not the same, but exceedingly different?”—“I do.”—“And now,
you say again, that the Pious, is that which is pleasing to the Gods.
Either, therefore, we were wrong before, or if right before, we are
wrong now.”—“So it seems.”—“Let us then resume the consideration from
the beginning. For I will not voluntarily give it up until I am
instructed. And now by all means pay attention & tell me the truth. For
if you did not clearly understand the Pious & the Impious, you certainly
would not have prosecuted your old father for murder, on account of a
labouring man; you would have feared to offend the Gods, & disgrace
yourself before men, in case you were wrong. I am sure, therefore, that
you perfectly know the Pious and Impious: Tell it to me therefore, & do
not disguise it from me.”—“Another time, then: for now I am in a hurry
to go away.”—“See what you are doing! You go away, having cast me down
from a great hope which I had, of learning from you the nature of Piety,
& getting rid of Melitus & his indictment, by convincing him that I had
been made wise in divine things by Euthyphron, & that I would not any
longer from ignorance promulgate crude ideas & innovate in religious
matters, but would hereafter lead a better life.”

Here ends the dialogue; which, if it has any purpose, further than as a
specimen of confutation, seems intended chiefly to discredit the most
pernicious parts of the Greek mythology, & the corruptions which it had
introduced into the moral ideas of the people.

Edition: current; Page: [197]


The Laches

[Holograph MS, Berg Collection, New York Public Library, entitled “Notes
on the Laches of Plato.” Paper watermarked 1828. Not mentioned in JSM’s
bibliography. For details concerning the manuscript and the
transcription, see the Textual Introduction, lxxxi-lxxxii above; for a
discussion of this and the other translations of Plato, see also the
Introduction, xvii-xxviii above.]

this little dialogue is an expansion of one of the arguments in the
Protagoras.

The characters in it are Lysimachus and Melesias, two Athenians of rank;
Nicias and Laches, the celebrated captains; & Socrates. The conversation
originated in the wish of Lysimachus & Melesias to ask the advice of
Nicias and Laches, respecting the education of their sons, who were now
adolescent, & to whom they were extremely desirous to give every kind of
instruction which could enable them to distinguish themselves. Among
other things, it had been suggested by some one, that the exercise of
the heavy-armed was a proper and useful branch of education for a young
man; & on this subject they consulted Laches and Nicias. Both expressed
their readiness to give their best advice; but Laches expressed his
surprise, that Lysimachus should have called in Nicias & himself as his
advisers in this matter, & should have passed over Socrates, who was
present, & whose life was devoted to the consideration, what studies and
modes of training were eligible. Lysimachus hereupon observed that
Sophroniscus, the father of Socrates, had been an old friend of his, but
that as, from his age, he seldom went out, he had not kept up the
acquaintance of Socrates himself, & was not aware that he was the same
Socrates of whom he frequently heard his son & the other young man speak
in commendation. Now however being informed of the reputation of
Socrates, & hearing from Laches great praise of the conduct of Socrates
in the battle of Delium, & from Nicias, that he had recommended to him
as a teacher of music for his son, Damon, a man not only excellent in
his art, but in every respect a worthy tutor for a young man, he assured
him of his warm friendship & begged him to resume his intimacy with the
family for the sake of the two Edition: current; Page: [198] young men,
and to join with Nicias and Laches in giving his advice on the point on
which their opinion was now requested.

Socrates having expressed a wish first to hear the opinions of the two
others who were his seniors, Nicias proceeded to declare his opinion,
which was favorable to the study of the heavy-armed exercise: on the
ground that to the advantages of the other gymnastic exercises, it added
the recommendation of being an exercise in the very operation for which
those exercises were intended: to prepare the body, viz. actual warfare:
that when the line was broken either in pursuit or in flight, he who had
learnt this exercise would be better able to cope with the enemy
single-handed; that it is a preparation for, & incitement to, all other
martial exercises & studies; that it increases personal courage, & even
improves the personal appearance, & renders the aspect of the warrior
more formidable.

Laches, being next asked for his opinion, gave it the other way, saying,
“It is hard to say of any branch of knowledge that it is not worth
learning; for it is good to know every thing. And if this is, as the
teachers of it affirm, really a branch of knowledge, it is very fit to
learn it: but if they are imposters, & it is not a branch of knowledge,
or if it be a branch, but a trifling & insignificant one, what occasion
is there to learn it? Now, if it were really good for any thing, it
would not have escaped the notice of the Lacedæmonians, who occupy
themselves with scarcely any thing in life but the means of obtaining
military superiority: And at all events, the teachers of this art are
well aware that the Lacedæmonians pay more attention to military
affairs, than all the other Greeks, & that a man would be able to gain
most money from the other Greeks as a teacher of military exercises if
he were in reputation on that account at Lacedæmon; as a tragic poet
would, if in reputation at Athens: Accordingly whoever thinks he can
compose a good tragedy comes straight to Athens to try his fortune; but
these teachers of the heavy-armed exercise seem to regard Lacedæmon as
an inaccessible sanctuary, & never go near it, but prefer exhibiting
their talents any where else, & particularly in those places of which
the inhabitants would themselves admit that the Lacedæmonians were much
their superiors in warfare. Besides,” continued Laches, “I have seen
some of these men in actual combat: In every thing else, those who
obtain the greatest name, are those who have studied & practised the
thing in question; but it so happens that not one of the men who have
practised this exercise as a profession, ever acquired a name as a
warrior. My opinion of the matter is this, that a man otherwise a
coward, studying this exercise, will probably have more confidence &
therefore obtain more frequent opportunities of exposing himself; and if
a brave man practises it, he will be so watched that if he makes even a
slight mistake he will be vehemently censured: for the pretension to
such knowledge excites jealousies, & a man Edition: current; Page: [199]
must be very much the superior of other men in the military virtues, if
he would escape ridicule & contempt, professing to have made this his
study.”

Lysimachus now called upon Socrates, saying that as the other two had
given opposite opinions, it depended upon Socrates to decide.—“What,”
answered Socrates: “Will you take whichever side obtains the greatest
number of our suffrages?”—“What else can I do?” replied Lysimachus.—“And
you, Melesias,” resumed Socrates: “If you were considering what
exercises your son should learn, would your decision be governed by the
proportionate numbers of our suffrages, or by the opinion of that one
among us who had been trained under the best gymnast?”—“By the latter,
in preference.”—“You would pay more attention to him, than to all four
of us.”—“Perhaps so.”—“For in order to decide rightly, the decision
should be governed by knowledge rather than by
numbers.”—“Certainly.”—“You ought, then, first to consider, whether
there is or is not any one of us who possesses a scientific knowledge of
the subject, & if so, to be guided by him, & leave the others alone; if
not, to seek another adviser. For you have now at stake, not some
trifle, but your greatest possession, for such as your sons are, such
will be the whole of your domestic economy.”—“True.”—“How then should we
enquire, in order to know which of us has the most scientific knowledge
on the subject of exercises? Would not the answer be, he who had
learned, & practised, under good teachers?”—“Yes.”—“Teachers of
what?”—“What do you mean?”—“It seems to me that we have not yet
determined, what is the subject on which we are considering which of us
has acquired scientific knowledge, under a master, & which has
not.”—“Are we not,” said Nicias, “considering the subject of the
heavy-armed exercise, whether a young man should learn it or
not?”—“True,” answered Socrates. “But when we are considering respecting
any particular ointment for the eyes, whether it should be applied or
not, do you think that we are deliberating on the subject of the
ointment, or on that of the eyes?”—“On the eyes.”—“And when we consider
whether a bridle should be laid upon a horse or not, we are considering
on the subject of the horse, not of the bridle.”—“Yes.”—“And in one
word, when we are considering of one thing for the sake of another
thing, the real subject of our deliberation is the thing for the sake of
which we consider, not the thing which we consider for its
sake.”—“Certainly.”—“Then we should, in the choice of an adviser,
consider whether he has a scientific knowledge of the management of that
for the sake of which we are considering.”—“True.”—“But we are
considering of a branch of instruction for the sake of the minds of
these young men.”—“Yes.”—“Then we must consider, whether any of us has a
scientific knowledge of the management of the mind, & can manage it
well, & has had good teachers.”—“But,” interrupted Laches, “have you not
known men Edition: current; Page: [200] who have attained greater
scientific knowledge without teachers, than with them?”—“I have,”
replied Socrates: “but if these men said that they were good artists,
you would not believe them unless they could shew you well executed
works, each in his particular art.”—“True.”—“We then,” said Socrates,
addressing Laches & Nicias, “since we have been called in to advise
Lysimachus & Melesias with a view to the proper training of the minds of
their sons, ought to produce our own teachers, men who have trained many
other minds & trained them well before teaching us; & if any of us says
that he has had no teacher, he should, if he can, produce his own acts,
& shew who among Athenians or foreigners, slaves or freemen, has become
a good man by his means: And if we can do neither of these things we
should not run the risk of injuring the minds of the sons of our best
friends, but should bid them seek other advisers. I, for my own part,
say at once, that I have not had any teachers in this matter, although
from my earliest youth I have desired to be instructed in it. But I have
not money to give to the sophists, who alone professed to be able to
make me a good & eminent man: And I have not up to this time been able
to discover the art for myself. But I should not wonder if Nicias and
Laches had learnt it or discovered it: for they are richer than I, &
were therefore able to learn it from others, & older, so that they are
more likely to have found it out. And they seem capable of educating a
man; for they would not have given their opinion so confidently
respecting good & bad modes of instructing youth if they had not
confidence in the sufficiency of their own knowledge. I therefore
confide in them in other respects, but wonder at their differing from
one another. And I exhort you, Lysimachus, to interrogate Nicias &
Laches, & say to them, Tell us whether you know the art of educating
youth by having learnt it from some one else, or by having discovered it
for yourselves, & if by learning it from others, who were your teachers,
& what other teachers there are of the same art, that if your attention
is engrossed by the affairs of the state, we may go to the teachers, &
prevail with them by gifts or prayers to train our sons & yours, & if
you have yourselves discovered the art tell us what persons besides you
have made good & great men by your training. For if you are only now
beginning to practise the art, consider lest you should be making
experiments, not upon a worthless material but upon your sons & those of
your friends, & learning pottery, as the proverb says, in the pot
itself.”*

Edition: current; Page: [201]
Lysimachus, with great simplicity, declared that Socrates was in the
right, & requested Nicias & Laches to let Socrates interrogate them, &
to make answer as he proposed. Nicias hereupon remarked that it was easy
to see that Lysimachus knew Socrates only by his father & not
personally, or not since he was a child.—“How so?” answered
Lysimachus.—“Because you do not seem to know that whoever gets into
conversation with Socrates, is sure, whatever they might be talking
about at first, to be twisted round by Socrates until he is forced to
give an account of himself, what sort of a life he leads & has
heretofore led; & when he has got upon this subject, Socrates never lets
him go until all this has been fully examined & soundly criticized. I,”
continued Nicias, “am accustomed to him, & know that it is impossible to
avoid undergoing all this from him, & that I shall not be able to avoid
it now: for I like to converse with the man, & think that there is no
harm in being reminded of any thing which we have done, or are doing,
improperly, & that a man will be the more careful in his after life if
he does not fly from this, but is willing & desirous (as Solon says) to
learn as long as he lives, & does not think that age brings good sense
along with it as a matter of course. I therefore have no objection to be
taken to task by Socrates, & I knew before, that, Socrates being
present, the discourse would not turn upon the young men but upon
ourselves. Let us hear what Laches says on the subject.”

“My case is very simple,” answered Laches; “or rather not simple but
double, for I may sometimes be thought to love discussion & sometimes to
hate it. When I hear a man discoursing on the subject of virtue or
wisdom, who is a true man, and worthy of the language he holds, I am
pleased, seeing that the speaker & what he says are suitable to, & in
unison with each other, & that such a man is the best of musicians,
having the true harmony not of sounds but of life. I delight so much
therefore in the discourses of such a man, that I might seem to any one,
fond of discussion: But a man who acts ill, the more excellently he
talks, annoys me the more, & makes me appear a hater of discussion. I
have not yet tried Socrates in words, but I have tried him in acts, &
found him worthy of the finest discourses & the greatest freedom of
speech. I therefore should be delighted to be examined by such a man, &
to learn from him, for I too am desirous, with Solon, to grow old
constantly acquiring knowledge, but on condition, that my teachers shall
be worthy men. This therefore must be granted to me: but whether my
teacher is younger than myself, or not yet in repute, & so forth, I do
not care. Since that day, Socrates, when I made trial of you in peril, &
proved your virtue, I am willing that you should instruct me & refute me
as much as you please.”

Socrates therefore proposed that instead of enquiring what teachers they
had respectively had in this sort of instruction, & what persons they
had Edition: current; Page: [202] themselves rendered worthier than
before, they should enter into another enquiry which tended to the same
end, but commenced higher up, & nearer to first principles.

“If we knew, respecting any thing, that if it were communicated to
another thing it made that other thing better than it was before; & if
we also had power to cause it to be so communicated; we must evidently
know that thing, concerning which we are able to advise, how it might
best & most easily be acquired. To explain myself more clearly; if we
happen to know that sight, when it is communicated to the eyes, makes
them better than they would otherwise be, & if besides, we have the
power of communicating sight to the eyes, it is evident that we must
know what sight is, or we should be very ill qualified to advise how the
eyes might acquire it.”—“True,” answered Laches.—“And we are now asked,
in what way the minds of these young men may, by the acquisition of
virtue, be made better.”—“Certainly.”—“Is it not, then, necessary that
we should know, what virtue is? for if we did not know what it is, how
should we be capable of giving advice, how it may best be
acquired?”—“Not at all.”—“We profess, then, to know what it is.”—“We
do.”—“And if we know, we can tell.”—“Certainly.”

“Let us not, then, consider respecting the whole of virtue at once, but
some part of it. It will then be easier to discover, whether we
sufficiently understand it.”—“Be it so.”—“What part shall we chuse? That
part, probably, to which the exercise of the heavy-armed appears to
tend. It is thought by most persons to tend to courage.”—“It is.”—“Let
us first then, endeavour to shew, what courage is: next, in what manner
young men may acquire it, so far as it is capable of being acquired by
study & training. Try, therefore, to say, what courage is.”—“It is not
difficult. If a man is willing to remain in his rank and resist the
enemy, & does not run away, he is a courageous man.”—“You say well; but
probably by my fault, & the indistinctness of what I said, you have not
answered what I had in mind, but something else.”—“How?”—“I will tell
you. He is courageous who remains in his rank & fights.”—“He is.”—“But
what do you say of him who runs away & fights, instead of remaining in
his rank?”—“How runs away?”—“Like the Scythians, who are said to fight
flying, as well as pursuing; & the horses of Æneas & Æneas himself are
praised in Homer, for being good in flight, as well as in
pursuit.”[*]—“And very properly, for Homer was speaking of chariots: &
what you say of the Scythians relates to cavalry. For their cavalry
fight in that manner; but the heavy infantry of the Greeks, in the
manner I speak of.”—“Except perhaps the Lacedæmonians, who are said to
have won the battle of Platæa in full retreat, & only to have Edition:
current; Page: [203] turned round & pursued when the enemy were fairly
broken.”—“True.”—“This then is what I meant, in saying that I had caused
you to make a wrong answer, by putting a wrong question. I meant to ask
you, not only respecting those who are courageous in the heavy infantry,
but in the cavalry, & all modes of warfare, & not only in war, but in
danger by sea, or in disease, or in endurance of poverty, or in
political affairs, & not only those who are courageous with respect to
pain or fear, but to desires & pleasures, being able to fight against
them. For some are courageous in such things.”—“Extremely so.”—“All
these, then, are courageous, but some of them are so in pleasure, others
in pain, some in desire, others in fear. And some are cowardly in each
of these things.”—“Yes.”—“Let us then enquire what these two qualities
are. And first, let us consider, what courage is; being, as it is, one &
the same thing in all these matters. Do you understand me?”—“Not
exactly.”—“As if I were to ask you, what quickness is; the case being,
that we may have quickness in running, in playing the harp, in speaking,
in learning, & in many other things: In short, it may exist in the
operations of the hands, the legs, the voice, or the mind. Now if I were
asked what this is, which is called quickness in all these operations, I
should answer, that the power which effects much in a short time is
quickness, whether it exists in the voice, in running, or in any thing
else.”—“Right.”—“Do you, then, try to say, what power it is, which,
being one & the same in pleasure, in pain, & in all the other things
which we have mentioned, is called courage.”

“It seems to me,” answered Laches, “that courage, if it is common to all
these things, is a certain determination of soul.”*

“You do not,” (replied Socrates,) “I suspect, give to all determination
of soul, the name of courage. For I am pretty sure that you consider
courage as an admirable thing.”—“One of the most admirable.”—“Then,
considerate determination is admirable.”—“It is.”—“But inconsiderate
determination? Is not this, on the contrary, hurtful &
mischievous?”—“Yes.”—“What is hurtful, you do not call
admirable?”—“Certainly not.”—“Then you do not call this sort of
determination, courage.”—“No.”—“Considerate determination, then, is what
you consider to be courage.”—“So it seems.”—“Considerate, then, upon
what? Upon all things, great or small? For example, if any one spends
money with determination, in a considerate manner, knowing that it will
bring him an ample return, do you call him courageous?”—“Certainly
not.”—“If a physician, his son being ill & desiring to eat or drink some
thing, refuses it to him with determination, do you call him
courageous?”—“Nor him either.”—“If a Edition: current; Page: [204] man
fights with determination in battle, reflecting considerately, that he
will receive assistance & has superiority of numbers & of ground, do you
consider him more courageous than the man in the opposite army, who
determinedly resists?”—“The latter is the more courageous.”—“But his
courage is more inconsiderate than that of the other.”—“True.”—“And you
consider him who fights on horseback with determination, being a skilful
rider, or with bows & arrows, being a good archer, or who dives with
determination being expert in the art, less courageous than those who do
all these things being less skilful?”—“Yes.”—“But all these persons shew
determination, & incur danger, more inconsiderately than they who do
these things with art.”—“They do.”—“But we decided, that inconsiderate
boldness & determination was hurtful, & disgraceful.”—“We did.”—“And
that courage was admirable.”—“Yes.”—“But now we say that this
disgraceful thing, inconsiderate determination, is courage.”—“So it
seems.”—“Are we right, then?”—“Certainly not.”—“We are not, to use your
expression, in unison, for our deeds, & our words, are not in harmony
with each other. In deed, it seems, you & I might be said to be
courageous, but in words, if one were to judge by our present discourse,
he would say we were not.”—“True.”—“Shall we then listen to our own
discourse?”—“What discourse?”—“That which bids us have determination.
Let us proceed in a determined manner with the investigation, lest
Courage itself should laugh at us for not seeking for it courageously,
if courage be determination.”—“I am ready,” answered Laches, “although
unused to such discussions. But a kind of contentiousness has seized me,
& I am angry if I am not able to speak according to my own thoughts: I
seem to myself to conceive what courage is, but it slipt through my
fingers, I know not how, & I could not seize it in words & explain
it.”—“A good hunter, then, should persevere, & not relax the
pursuit.”—“Certainly.”—“Shall we call in Nicias to aid us in the
pursuit, if he have any resource which we have not?”—“Certainly.”—“Come,
then, Nicias, assist your friends who are in difficulties. You see that
we are at a loss; if you can tell what courage is, you will relieve us
from our embarrassment and confirm your own views.”

“I thought all along,” answered Nicias, “that you were not defining
courage rightly; because you made no use of something very good which I
have often heard you say.”—“What was that?”—“You have often said that
each of us is good, in those things wherein he is wise, & bad in those
wherein he is ignorant.”—“It is very true.”—“Then if a courageous man is
good, he must be wise?”—“Do you hear, Laches?” said Socrates.—“Yes,”
answered Laches, “but I do not quite understand him.”—“I think I do,”
said Socrates, “& that he affirms courage to be a kind of wisdom.”—“What
kind?” rejoined Laches.—Socrates begged Nicias to answer; “what Edition:
current; Page: [205] sort of wisdom it is which constitutes courage.
Certainly not that which relates to flute-playing.”—“No.”—“Nor to
harp-playing.”—“No.”—“What sort of wisdom is it, then? What is it the
knowledge of?”—Laches commended this mode of interrogation, & Nicias
answered, “The knowledge of what is dangerous, & what is safe, both in
war and in other things.”

“How strangely he talks!” said Laches.—“In what respect?” asked
Socrates.—“Surely wisdom & courage are very different things.”—“Nicias
says not.”—“He does, & therein he talks nonsense.”—“Let us instruct him
then, & not abuse him.”—“Laches,” said Nicias, “seems to desire that I
too should appear to have nothing to say, because he himself is in that
predicament.”—“Yes,” answered Laches, “& I think I can shew it. Do not
physicians know what is dangerous in diseases? Or do you say that the
courageous men know it? Or, do you say that physicians, & courageous
men, are the same thing?”—“Not at all.”—“Nor husbandmen either, I
suppose. And yet, they know what is dangerous in husbandry; & all other
workmen know what is dangerous & what is safe in their several arts; but
they are not the more courageous.”

“What do you think, Nicias,” asked Socrates, “of the remark of Laches?
There seems to be something in it.”—“There is something in it, but not
the truth.”—“How?”—“Because he fancies that physicians know something
more about the sick, than what is productive of health, & what of
disease. They, however, know merely this. Whether health is not more
dangerous to some people than sickness, do you suppose they know that?
Or do you not think that to some it is better not to recover from
illness than to recover? Tell me, Laches: Do you affirm that it is
better for all to live, or do you not say, that for many it is better to
die?”—“It is.”—“Do you think that the same things can be considered
dangers, to those for whose benefit it would be to die, and to those for
whom it would be good to live?”—“No.”—“Do you give to the physicians the
office of discriminating these things? or to any other man of science,
except to the man who knows what is & is not dangerous, whom I call
courageous?”

“Do you understand, Laches, what he means?” asked Socrates.—“Yes,”
replied Laches: “his courageous man is a prophet: for who else can tell
whether it is better for a man to die or to live? And pray, Nicias, do
you affirm yourself to be a prophet, or admit yourself not to be a brave
man?”—“Do you think,” answered Nicias, “that it belongs to a prophet to
know what is dangerous & what is safe?”—“To whom else?”—“Much rather to
the man I am speaking of. A prophet is only supposed to know the signs
of future events; whether a person will die, or be ill, or lose his
property, or be victorious or vanquished: but which fate would be most
beneficial to any individual, it no more belongs to a prophet to judge,
than to any body else.”—“I do not understand him, Socrates,” answered
Edition: current; Page: [206] Laches: “The person whom he calls
courageous, is neither a physician, nor a prophet, nor any body else
whatever, unless he means some God. It appears to me that Nicias is not
willing boldly to confess that he has nothing to say, but twists
backward and forward to conceal his perplexity. You & I could have
twisted in the same manner, if we had wished to avoid apparently
contradicting ourselves. If we had been pleading in a court of justice,
there might have been some reason in this: but why should a man seek to
dignify himself by vain talk in a conversation like this?”—“Certainly,”
answered Socrates: “but perhaps Nicias thinks there is something in what
he says, & does not say it merely for the sake of talk. Let us therefore
question him more particularly about his meaning, that if there be any
thing in it, we may agree with him, if not, instruct him.”—“Do you then
interrogate him if you will: I have interrogated him enough.”—“I have no
objection; & I will interrogate for you & me jointly.

“You say, Nicias, that courage is the knowledge of what is dangerous &
what is safe.”—“I do.”—“To know this, does not belong to all men, since
neither a physician nor a prophet knows it nor is courageous, unless he
acquires this knowledge too.”—“Certainly.”—“Then, as the proverb says,
it is not every sow that knows it, & is courageous.”—“No.”—“Then you do
not consider even the famous sow of Crommyon to be courageous. I do not
speak this in jest; but one who holds your opinion cannot allow any
brute animal to be courageous, since it cannot be admitted that any
brute, a lion or a panther or a goat, is so wise as to know what few men
know, from the difficulty of learning it. A lion & a deer, a bull & a
monkey, are absolutely on a level in respect to courage, if it be what
you say it is.”—Laches was delighted with this remark, & triumphantly
asked Nicias whether he affirmed that these beasts, which all admit to
be courageous, are wiser than men, or, contrary to universal opinion,
denied them to be courageous?

Nicias answered, “I do not call any thing courageous, but silly, which
does not fear what is really dangerous, from mere ignorance. Do you
suppose I call every child courageous, which, from ignorance, fears
nothing? Fearless, & courageous, are not synonymous. Very few persons in
my opinion possess courage & forethought, but many, both men, women,
children & brutes, are bold, & daring, & fearless, without forethought.
These then, which you & the multitude call courageous, I call bold, but
I call those only courageous who have thought.”—“You see, Socrates,”
said Laches, “how he as he thinks, dignifies himself by his argument,
but those whom all admit to be courageous, he attempts to deprive of
that honour.”—“Be of good heart,” answered Nicias; “I say that you, &
Lamachus, & many other Athenians, are wise, if you are
courageous.”—Hereupon Socrates either in jest or in earnest says to
Laches, that he did not seem to be aware that Nicias had learnt this
wisdom from Damon, who Edition: current; Page: [207] had conversed much
with Prodicus, who was esteemed the cleverest of the sophists in making
verbal distinctions.—“These subtleties,” answered Laches, “are more
suitable to a sophist than to a man whom the state thinks worthy of
presiding in its councils.”—“And yet,” observed Socrates, “he who
presides in the greatest things ought to have the greatest wisdom. It
seems to me that Nicias deserves to have what he says examined, & his
reasons for defining courage as he does, explored.”—They accordingly
agree to question Nicias further, which Socrates does, as follows.

“We began the examination of courage, considering it to be a part of
virtue.”—“Certainly.”—“If you distinguished this as one part, there must
be other parts.”—“There are.”—“Are these other parts what I call them?
viz. justice, & temperance, & so on.”—“Certainly.”—“So far we are then
agreed. Let us now consider whether we all mean the same thing by
Dangerous, & Safe. We call those things dangerous which excite fear,
safe which do not. But the things which excite fear, are not past or
present evils, but future ones: for fear is the expectation of a future
evil. Do you not think so, Laches?”—“Entirely so.”—“We, then, Nicias,
mean by dangerous things, future evils; by safe things, future things
which are not evil, or which are good. Do you think the same?”—“I
do.”—“The knowledge of these things, then, you term courage.”—“I
do.”—“Now, Laches & I think, that on any subject on which there is
knowledge, there is not one knowledge about the thing when it is past,
viz. the knowledge how it did happen, another about it when present, how
it is happening & a third, how that which has not yet happened, may best
happen; but that all this knowledge is one. For instance, respecting
health, one single branch of knowledge, viz. medicine, considers both of
what has conduced to health, of what does conduce to it, & what will:
The same may be said of husbandry: and of the military art. The art of
generalship considers both of past, present, & future, & is not
subordinate to the art of prophecy, but uses that art as subordinate to
itself, considering itself to know best the future as well as the past,
in respect to war. Is this right, Laches?”—“It is.”—“Do you agree with
us, Nicias, that the knowledge of the future, of the past & of the
present, are all the same?”—“I do.”—“But courage, you say, is the
knowledge of the dangerous, & the safe.”—“Yes.”—“The dangerous means,
future evil, the safe, future good.”—“Yes.”—“And of the same thing,
whether past, present, or future, there is but one & the same
knowledge.”—“Yes.”—“Courage, then, is not merely the knowledge of the
dangerous & the safe: for it does not only understand respecting future
good & evil, but likewise past & present, like all other branches of
knowledge.”—“So it seems.”—“Then you only told us one third part of
courage, instead of the whole. And now, it seems, courage is not merely
the knowledge of the dangerous & the safe, but nearly of all good & evil
Edition: current; Page: [208] whatever. Can you say otherwise?”—“I
cannot.”—“Then, if a man know how all that is good & all that is evil
has been produced, is produced, & will be produced, of what virtue would
he be destitute? Do you think that he would need any further justice or
piety, he who would be able to provide all that is good and avoid all
that is evil both in respect to gods & men?”—“There seems to be some
reason in what you say.”—“Courage then at this rate is not a part of
virtue, but the whole.”—“So it seems.”—“But we said that it is only a
part.”—“We did.”—“Then we have not yet found out what courage is.”—“It
appears, we have not.”—“I thought,” said Laches, “that you would find it
out, since you despised my answers to Socrates: I had great hopes that
by the wisdom you derived from Damon you would discover it.”—“So,”
answered Nicias, “you think it nothing that you have been shewn to know
nothing about courage, but are satisfied if I appear equally ignorant, &
it will make no difference to you now, it seems, that both you & I are
utterly ignorant of what a man who thinks anything of himself ought to
know. You appear to me to do what is very common, to look not to your
own mind, but to the opinion of others: for my part, I think that I have
answered very tolerably on this subject, & that if any part of what I
have said is not sufficient, I shall be able hereafter to correct it, by
discussion both with Damon, whom you pretend to laugh at without ever
having seen him, & with other people. And when I have mastered the
subject, I will not grudge to instruct you upon it; for you seem to me
to have very great occasion to learn.”—“For you yourself are a wise
man,” answered Laches. “But for all that, I would advise Lysimachus &
Melesias to let you & me alone about the education of their sons, but,
as I said at first, not to let go their hold of Socrates: for if my own
sons were old enough, I would do the same thing.”—“I agree with you,”
said Nicias, “that if Socrates would consent to take charge of the young
men no other person needs be sought for: I would most gladly commit my
son Niceratus to his care, if he would consent: but whenever I mention
the subject he recommends other people to me, but will not himself
consent.”—Lysimachus begged Socrates nevertheless to take charge of the
two youths & join in making them as excellent as possible.

“It would be shameful,” replied Socrates, “not to be willing to join in
making any one as excellent as possible. If therefore in our
conversation just now, I had appeared to know & these two to be
ignorant, it would have been just to call me in particular to this work:
but as we were all equally at a loss, which of us could any one prefer?
None of us, as it appears to me. Hear therefore what I would advise:
That we should all of us jointly seek out the best teacher for ourselves
in the first place, & afterwards for our children; neither sparing money
nor any thing else. But to be contented as we are now, I do not advise.
And if any one laughs at us for putting Edition: current; Page: [209]
ourselves to school at our age, we can quote Homer against him. That
poet says, that it is not good for a needy man to be ashamed.[*] Let us
therefore, without minding what people may say, attend both to ourselves
& to the young men, at once.”—Lysimachus expressed his satisfaction, &
said, the older he was, the more ready he would be to learn with the
young men; & he invited Socrates to come the next day, that they might
resume the deliberation. Socrates consented, and in this manner, without
settling any one of the questions which they had been discussing, the
dialogue breaks off.

Edition: current; Page: [210]


The Lysis

[Holograph MS, Berg Collection, New York Public Library, entitled “Notes
on the Lysis of Plato.” Ff. 1-6 watermarked 1825; the remainder, 1828.
Not mentioned in JSM’s bibliography. For details concerning the
manuscript and the transcription, see the Textual Introduction,
lxxxi-lxxxii above; for a discussion of this and the other translations
of Plato, see also the Introduction, xvii-xxviii above.]

the subject of this dialogue is friendship:* and it is one of the
numerous dialogues of Plato which are merely tentative, examining and
rejecting a variety of opinions without adopting any. One indirect
purpose seems to be, to ridicule several of the wise saws of the
sophists, & naturalists, Empedocles & others.

Hippothales, a friend of Socrates, was attached to a very young man
named Lysis. Ctesippus, another friend of Hippothales, rallied him in
the presence of Socrates, on the extraordinary degree in which he was
absorbed by the idea of this young man, & the extravagances which he
performed in order to recommend himself to him. Socrates enquired what
particular mode he took of winning the favour of Lysis: and Ctesippus
again laughed at him for finding nothing to say except commonplaces
which every child knew, making verses on the divine descent & heroic
actions of Lysis’s progenitors & so forth, which all the town had in its
mouth. Socrates hereupon asked Hippothales, why he composed an encomium
on himself before he had gained the prize. Hippothales not understanding
this, Socrates continued, “All these verses of yours tend directly to
yourself. For, if you succeed in winning the object of your love, all
these encomiums on him will be encomiums on yourself, for having
succeeded with so distinguished a person: But if you fail, the more you
have puffed the object of your pursuit, the greater good will you be
thought to have lost, & will be laughed at accordingly. A person
therefore who is wise in love affairs, takes care not to praise the
beloved object until he has won it, for fear of what Edition: current;
Page: [211] may happen. Besides, if you praise them, they are puffed up
with conceit & self-will: & the more self-willed they become, the more
difficult it is to gain them. But what sort of a hunter should you think
him who made his game wilder & more difficult to catch; or him who by
his songs & incantations did not sooth, but stir up? Take care that you
do not resemble those persons.”

Hippothales admitted the justice of all this, & begged Socrates to
advise him, what words or deeds he thought would most recommend him to
the object of his affection. Socrates saying that he could not tell
unless he could converse with Lysis himself, Hippothales and Ctesippus
obtained for him an opportunity of entering into conversation with
Lysis, in company with another young man of the same age, named
Menexenus.

Socrates said to Menexenus, “Which of you two is the elder?”—“We
doubt.”—“Then you must dispute, which is the more noble.”—Menexenus
assented.—“And which is the handsomer.”—They both smiled.—“You will not
dispute which is the richer; for you are friends; & friends have all
things in common, if what they say of friendship is true, so that there
can be no difference between you in this respect.”—They agreed.—Socrates
was about to ask them, which of them was the most just & wise, when
Menexenus was called away, and Socrates addressed himself to Lysis.

“Do your father & mother love you extremely?”—“They do.”—“Then they wish
you to be happy.”—“Certainly.”—“Is a person happy, who is a slave, &
allowed to do nothing which he desires?”—“No.”—“Then your parents, I
suppose, allow you to do as you please, and never admonish or restrain
you.”—“Indeed they do, very often.”—“What! do they wish you to be happy,
& not let you do as you like? If you desired to drive one of your
father’s chariots at the public contests, would they not permit
you?”—“Certainly not.”—“But whom would they permit?”—“My father has a
charioteer to whom he pays wages.”—“So they permit a hired servant to do
what he pleases with the horses, & will not permit you. And they even
pay him money for doing it.”—“What then?”—“But I suppose they allow you
to drive the team of mules, & whip them too, if you have a
mind.”—“Certainly not.”—“What! Is nobody allowed to whip
them?”—“Certainly: the carter.”—“Is he a slave or a freeman?”—“A
slave.”—“So it seems they value a slave more than you, their son, &
commit their affairs to him rather than to you, & allow him to do as he
pleases, but will not allow you. Answer me another question. Do they
allow you to govern yourself, or do they not even trust you with
that?”—“They do not.”—“Who governs you?”—“My tutor.”—“Is he a
slave?”—“Yes, he is one of our slaves.”—“It is a shame that a freeman
should be governed by a slave. What does this tutor do to you?”—“He
takes me to school.”—“Does the schoolmaster govern you
too?”—“Undoubtedly.”—“It seems then, your father voluntarily sets a
Edition: current; Page: [212] great number of masters over you. And pray
when you come home to your mother, does she let you do as you please
with her loom and her web, that you may be happy? Of course, she does
not prevent you from meddling with her distaff or spindle & the rest of
her spinning apparatus.”—Lysis laughed, & said, he should be punished,
if he ventured to touch them.—“Indeed! Pray, have you offended your
father or your mother?”—“Not I.”—“What is the reason, then, that they
prevent you from being happy, & make you pass your whole time in slavery
to some person or other, doing hardly any thing of what you desire? So
that it seems you are never the better for all your wealth (for every
body has more power over it than you have) nor for your fine person, for
even that is placed under the tutelage of another man: you have power
over nobody, & nothing.”—“Because I am not yet old enough.”—“That is no
hindrance; for there are some things, I suppose, which your father &
mother permit you to do, without waiting till you grow older. When they
want any body to read or write for them, I dare say you are the first
person whom they apply to: and when you take up the lyre, they do not
hinder you from striking what chords you please.”—“They do not.”—“What,
then, is the reason that in these things they do not prevent you, but in
the other things which we were talking about, they do?”—“I suppose it is
because I understand these things & do not understand the others.”—“Then
it is not age which your father waits for in order to entrust you with
his affairs, but sense: & the day he thinks you have more sense than he,
he will commit himself & his affairs to your care.”—“I suppose so.”—“And
will not your neighbour do the same? Will he not entrust to you the
management of his household, as soon as he thinks you understand
domestic economy better than himself? And will not the Athenians entrust
their affairs to you, when they see that you have sufficient
understanding?”—“Yes.”—“And the Great King? Would he rather, think you,
permit his own eldest son & heir to the throne, to put what he pleased
into the pot where the meat is boiling, or us, if we could convince him
that we knew more about cookery than his son?”—“Us.”—“He would not
suffer his son to put in any thing; but he would let us empty the
salt-box into it, if we thought fit.”—“Certainly.”—“And if his son had
sore eyes, would he allow him to touch them himself, if he did not think
him skilled in medicine?”—“Certainly not.”—“But us, if he thought us
skilful physicians, he would allow even to open the eyes and throw in
ashes, if we liked.”—“True.”—“He would entrust us in preference to
himself or his son, with every thing in which he considered us as wiser
than them.”—“He would.”—“It seems then that all Greeks or foreigners,
men or women, will trust us in those things with which we are well
acquainted; & we may do what we please in them, nobody will willingly
resist us, we shall be ourselves free, & shall govern others, & these
things will be ours, for we Edition: current; Page: [213] shall be
benefitted by them. But in those things of which we possess no
understanding, no one will suffer us to do what we please, but will
throw every possible obstacle in our way; not only strangers, but our
own father & mother; & in these things we shall be subject to others, &
these things will be foreign to us, for we shall derive no benefit from
them.”—“Granted.”—“Shall we be loved by any body in those things in
which we are useless?”—“Certainly not.”—“Then at present, neither your
father loves you, nor does any one love any one, in so far as he is
useless.”—“Allowed.”—“If then you become wise, every one will be your
friend & every one will be attached to you, for you will be useful &
good; but if not, neither any one else, nor even your father & mother &
relations, will be attached to you. Do you think, then, that it is
possible to think much of oneself, in those things in which one is
without thought?”—“It is not.”—“But if you need a schoolmaster, you are
as yet without thought.”—“True.”—“Then you do not think much of
yourself.”—“I do not think that I do.”

Socrates, who is the narrator of this dialogue, says, that he here
thought of Hippothales, & had a mind to say to him, that this was the
proper way to address a beloved object, humbling & chastening it rather
than exalting & puffing it up.

At this moment Menexenus returned, & Lysis boyishly whispered to
Socrates, to say the same things to Menexenus which he had said to him.
Socrates bid Lysis himself repeat them to him; which Lysis promised that
he would, but begged Socrates to say something else to Menexenus, that
he himself might hear. “I must,” replied Socrates, “if you bid me. But
mind that you come to my assistance if Menexenus attempts to refute me.
Do you not know that he is extremely disputatious?”—“That is the very
reason,” rejoined Lysis, “why I wish you to talk to him.”—“That I may
make myself ridiculous?”—“No; that you may correct him.”—“That is no
easy matter; he is a formidable person, a pupil of Ctesippus: & do you
not perceive that Ctesippus himself is here to assist him?”—“Never mind
that, but talk to him.”—Socrates at last consented, & addressed
Menexenus thus.

“From my childhood upwards there is one thing which I have always
desired to become possessed of. Other men have other fancies; one wishes
for horses, another for dogs, another for money, another for honours.
For my part, I am tolerably indifferent to these things, but am
extremely passionate for the acquisition of friends, & would rather have
a good friend, than the very best pigeon or cock in the world, or even
horse or dog; aye, rather than all the gold of Darius, or Darius
himself. When, therefore, I look upon you & Lysis, I felicitate you on
having been able while yet so young to acquire easily & quickly so
excellent a thing, while I am so far from Edition: current; Page: [214]
possessing it, that I do not even know in what manner one person is made
the friend of another, but would wish to question you on this subject,
as being a person experienced in it. Tell me, then, which of the two
becomes the other’s friend, he who loves, or he who is loved? Or is
there no difference?”—“It seems to me that there is no
difference.”—“What? Do they both become friends if only one of them
loves the other?”—“I think so.”—“May not a person love & be not loved in
return? May he not even be hated? Lovers at least say so.”—“True.”—“Then
which of the two is the friend? he who loves (whether he be loved in
return, or hated)? Or he who is loved? Or is neither of them the friend
of the other unless they both love one another?”—“It would seem
so.”—“Then nothing is dear to any one which does not love him in return.
And nobody is fond of horses unless the horses love him in return, nor
yet of dogs, nor of wine, nor of bodily exercises, no one is a lover of
wisdom (ϕιλόσοϕος) unless wisdom loves him in return. Or do men love
these things not being dear to them?”—“I think not.”—“Then that which is
loved, is dear to him who loves, whether it loves him in return or not.
For instance, young children, some of them not yet loving their parents,
others positively hating them when their father or mother has punished
them, are nevertheless dearer to their parents at that time than at any
other.”—“Yes.”—“Then the friend is not he who loves, but he who is
loved.”—“It seems so.”—“And the enemy, not he who hates, but he who is
hated.”—“So it appears.”—“Then many are loved by their enemies, & hated
by their friends, & are therefore the friends of their enemies & the
enemies of their friends, if the friend be he who is loved & not he who
loves. But this would be absurd.”—“True.”—“Then if this be absurd, it
follows that the friend is he who loves, not he who is loved.”—“It
does.”—“And the enemy is he who hates.”—“Yes.”—“But here the same
consequence follows, that a person is often the friend of one who is not
his friend, who is even his enemy, if he loves one who loves him not, or
who hates him; & he is often the enemy of one who is not his enemy, who
is even his friend, if he hates one who does not hate him, or who loves
him.”—“True.”—“What shall we do, then, if neither they who love are
friends, nor they who are loved, nor both those who love & those who are
loved? Whom can we name besides, who can be called friends?”—“I do not
know.”—“Perhaps we have pursued a wrong method of enquiry.”—Lysis here
observed that he thought they had: & Socrates, addressing himself to
Lysis, resumed:

“Let us follow, then, another course, seeking the assistance of the
poets, who are as it were our fathers & guides in wisdom. They say that
friends are brought together by the deity himself, who always brings
like to like.[*] And the wise men, who have written on Nature & the
Universe, say the same Edition: current; Page: [215] thing; that like is
always fond of like. Do they say true?”—“Perhaps.”—“Perhaps one half of
it is true, perhaps the whole; but we do not understand it. To us it
seems, that bad men, the nearer they come together & the more intimately
they associate, become the greater enemies. For they injure one another:
& the Injurer & the Injured cannot be friends.”—“Yes.”—“By this account,
then, one half of the adage cannot be true; for bad men are like each
other.”—“Very true.”—“The meaning therefore, I suppose, is, that good
men are like each other, & are friends, but that bad men, as is
sometimes said of them, are never even like themselves, but vacillating
and uncertain: & what is unlike itself, can scarcely be like any thing
else. Do you not think so?”—“I do.”—“Those, then, who say that like is
fond of like, wish to hint, that good men alone are friends; that a bad
man never forms a true friendship either with a good man or a bad
one.”—Lysis assented.—“We know, then, at last, who friends are: they are
those who are good.”—“So it seems.”—“But I have a difficulty still.
Like, is friendly to like, in proportion to the likeness: Is it useful
to its like, in the same proportion? Can a thing which is exactly like
another, possibly do that other any good or harm which it could not do
to itself? And if not, how can such things love one another, which can
be of no service to one another?”—“In no way.”—“And where there is no
love, how can there be friendship?”—“There cannot.”—“Then like is not
friendly to like: and a good man is friendly to a good man, not quâ
like, but quâ good.”—“Perhaps.”—“But what! Is not a good man, quâ good,
sufficient to himself?”—“Yes.”—“But he who is sufficient to himself, is
in want of nothing.”—“True.”—“And he who is in want of nothing can love
nothing.”—“No.”—“And he who does not love, is no friend.”—“It seems
not.”—“How then can the good man be the friend of the good, since
neither when absent do they desiderate each other (for they are
sufficient to themselves when apart) nor when present have they any
occasion for one another? How can such persons set much value upon each
other?”—“In no way.”—“But they who do not set much value upon each
other, are not friends.”—“True.”

“But observe, Lysis, how we are going wrong. We are mistaken in our
whole course.”—“How?”—“I now recollect to have heard somebody say, that
like is the greatest enemy of like, & the good, of the good. And he
quoted Hesiod, who says, that potter has a grudge against potter, bard
against bard, beggar against beggar.[*] He said, that like things must
be full of envy & jealousy & hatred of each other, & that only unlike
things are friendly. The poor man is of necessity friendly to the rich,
the weak to the strong, for the sake of his assistance, the sick man to
the physician, & all Edition: current; Page: [216] who do not know, love
those who know. And, far from its being true that like is fond of like,
the fondest things are direct contraries. Each thing desires its
contrary, not its like. Dry desires wet, cold desires heat, bitter
desires sweet, sharp desires blunt, what is empty desires fullness, what
is full, emptiness, & so on: for contraries are the food of each other,
but nothing has any enjoyment of its like. He seemed a clever fellow who
said this: What do you think of it?”—“It sounds very well,” replied
Menexenus.—“Shall we say then that contraries are fondest of each
other?”—“Yes.”

“But will not those wise persons the disputants attack us here, & ask
us, whether friendship & enmity are not direct contraries? Must we not
acknowledge, that they are?”—“We must.”—“But, they will say, is a friend
fond of an enemy, or an enemy of a friend?”—“No.”—“Is a just man, the
friend of an unjust, a temperate man, of an intemperate, a good man, of
a bad?”—“I should think not.”—“But they should, if contraries are the
best friends.”—“True.”—“Then neither like things, nor contrary things,
are friends.”—“It seems not.”

“Let us further consider whether we have not entirely missed the nature
of friendship, & whether that which is neither good nor bad, be not the
friend of what is good.”—“How?”—“I do not know; I am perplexed by the
difficulty of the discussion. I suspect that according to the old
proverb, τὸ καλὸν ϕίλον ἐστί;* for it must be something soft and smooth
& slippery, so easily does it slip through our fingers.

“Things may be divided into three classes, may they not? the Good, the
Bad, & that which is neither good nor bad.”—“True.”—“And the good is not
the friend of the good, nor the bad of the bad, nor the good of the bad,
as our former arguments have shewn. There remains therefore only what is
neither good nor bad, which must be the friend either of the good, or of
something of its own class: for nothing can be the friend of the
bad.”—“True.”—“But we said just now, that like was not the friend of
like.”—“We did.”—“What is neither good nor bad, cannot therefore be the
friend of any thing of its own kind.”—“It cannot.”—“Then it only
remains, for what is neither good nor bad to be the friend of what is
good.”—“It seems so.”

“Let us see, then, whether we are right in our conclusion. A body in
health has no need of medicine: a man in health, therefore, will not be
friendly to the physician by reason of his health.”—“He will not.”—“But
a sick man will, by reason of his disease.”—“Yes.”—“Disease is bad,
Medicine is useful and good.”—“Yes.”—“But the body, quâ body, is neither
good nor bad.”—“True.”—“The body is forced to love & attach Edition:
current; Page: [217] itself to medicine, by reason of disease.”—“It
is.”—“Then what is neither good nor bad, becomes friendly to what is
good, by reason of the presence of what is bad.”—“It seems
so.”—“Evidently, before it is itself rendered bad by the evil which is
in it. For it would not, after becoming evil, still continue to desire &
love what is good; for we said it was impossible for what is bad, to be
friendly to what is good.”—“True.”

“Consider then what I am going to say. I say, that some things
themselves become such as that thing is which is present to them; others
do not. For example, if any thing is smeared over with any particular
dye, the thing which is smeared over it is present to
it.”—“Certainly.”—“When this is the case, is the thing itself of the
colour of the dye, or not?”—“I do not understand.”—“If one were to
sprinkle over your yellow hair with flour, would it be white or only
appear so?”—“It would only appear.”—“And yet whiteness would be present
to it.”—“True.”—“And nevertheless it would not be white.”—“True.”—“But
when old age gives it the same colour, then, by the presence of white,
it will really become white, the colour of that which is present to
it.”—“No doubt.”—“I ask you, then, will that to which any thing is
present, be similar to the thing which is present to it? Or will it be
so only if the thing be present in a particular way, & not
otherwise?”—“The latter.”—“And what is neither good nor bad, if evil be
present to it, sometimes is not yet bad, sometimes it has already become
so.”—“Yes.”—“When, in the presence of evil it is not yet evil, that very
presence causes it to desire good; but that presence of evil in it,
which makes it evil, puts an end to its desire & love of good, for it
then is no longer neither good nor bad, but bad: & what is bad cannot be
friendly to what is good.”—“Certainly.”—“We may therefore say, that
those who are already wise, (whether they be men or Gods) no longer
philosophize (love wisdom), & on the other hand, neither do those
philosophize who are so ignorant as to be bad. For no bad & inept person
philosophizes. There remain only those who have this evil, ignorance,
but are not yet rendered silly or inept by it,—who still think
themselves not to know what they really do not know. Therefore, those
philosophize who are not yet either good nor bad: Those who are good, &
those who are bad, do not philosophize; for, as we have seen, contraries
are not fond of contraries, nor like of like.”—Menexenus & Lysis
assented.—“Now,” said Socrates, “we have found out what are & are not
friends. We have found, that, whether in body, in mind, or in any thing
else, what is neither good nor bad is the friend of what is good, by the
presence of evil.”—They both concurred, & Socrates, in telling the
story, says, that he was extremely delighted, like a hunter who had
secured his game. But soon, a troublesome suspicion seized him, that the
things they had assented to were wrong, & he told them, he was afraid
their wealth was visionary. “When a person is a friend, Edition:
current; Page: [218] he must be the friend of somebody.”—“He must.”—“Is
he so, for the sake of & in consequence of nothing, or for the sake of &
in consequence of something?”—“For the sake of & in consequence of
something.”—“And that something, for the sake of which one man is the
friend of another, is it an object of friendship or neither of
friendship nor of hatred?”—“I do not quite follow you.”—“I am not
surprised: you will perhaps follow me better this way—&I shall
understand myself better. The sick man, we said, has a friendship for
the physician.”—“Yes.”—“In consequence of disease, & for the sake of
health.”—“Yes.”—“Disease is an evil.”—“It is.”—“Health; is it an evil, a
good, or neither?”—“A good.”—“We said, that the body being neither good
nor evil, is friendly to medicine, in consequence of disease, that is,
in consequence of evil; medicine being a good. And medicine became the
object of this friendship for the sake of health; health being a
good.”—“Yes.”—“Is health an object of friendship, or of hatred?”—“Of
friendship.”—“Disease is an object of hatred.”—“Yes.”—“Then what is
neither good nor evil is, (in consequence of what is evil & odious,)
friendly to good, for the sake of what is good & an object of
friendship.”—“It seems so.”—“Then every object of friendship, is so for
the sake of some object of friendship & in consequence of some object of
hatred.”—“So it seems.”—“Well then, since we have come to this point,
let us see that we be not deceived. I let alone that what is friendly,
has been found to be so to something friendly, & like, to be friendly to
like, which we said was impossible. But let us consider this, that we
may not be deceived in what we are now saying. Medicine, we say, is an
object of friendship for the sake of health.”—“Yes.”—“Then health is an
object of friendship.”—“Certainly.”—“But if it be so, it is so for the
sake of something.”—“Yes.”—“Of some object of friendship, then, if it is
to agree with our former admissions.”—“Yes.”—“Then that also will be an
object of friendship for the sake of some other object of
friendship.”—“Yes.”—“Then is it not necessary that we should stop
somewhere in this progression, & arrive at some principle, which will no
longer be referred back to some other object of friendship, but which is
itself the primary object of friendship, & for the sake of which we say,
that all other things are so?”—“It is.”—“Now I suspect, that all these
other things which we say are objects of friendship for the sake of this
first principle, are mere copies & semblances of it, which impose upon
us; & there is no real object of friendship except that. Let us consider
thus. Suppose that a person values any particular thing exceedingly, as
for instance a father sometimes values his son above all other
possessions: Might not such a man value some other thing much, by reason
of his valuing his son supremely? For instance if his son had taken
poison, & wine were an antidote, he would value wine exceedingly.”—“What
then?”—“And consequently, the vessel in which the wine
is.”—“Certainly.”—“Could Edition: current; Page: [219] it be said,
however, that he valued an earthen pot, or half a pint of wine, as much
as his own son? Or is not the case rather this, that what he really
cares for in all his trouble & anxiety, is not those things which are
provided for the sake of something else, but that something else, for
the sake of which they are provided. It is true, we often say, that we
greatly value money; but the truth is not so: What we really value
supremely, is that for the sake of which money & all other things that
we provide, are provided.”—“True.”—“Then we shall say the same about
friendship. Those things which are dear to us for the sake of something
else, we shall call by some other name: that alone is really an object
of friendship, in which all these other attachments terminate.”—“So it
seems.”—“Then what is really an object of friendship, is not so for the
sake of some other object of friendship.”—“True.”—“Then this we have set
at rest. But is good an object of friendship?”—“It seems to me to be
so.”—“Is, then, Good an object of friendship on account of evil, & does
the case stand thus, If, of the three things which we have mentioned,
Good & Evil & what is neither good nor evil, two were left, but the
third, viz. Evil, were absolutely extirpated & did not exist in any body
or any mind or in any of the things which we call Good & Evil in
themselves, would Good in that case be of no use to us? for if nothing
any longer hurt us, we should not stand in need of any benefit. And in
this manner it would be obvious that we loved Good on account of Evil,
to wit as a medicine for it, Evil being a disease; & where there is no
disease there needs no medicine. Is this then the case, that Good is
loved by us, who are between good & evil, on account of evil, but is of
no use in itself?”—“It seems to be so.”—“Then that primary object of
friendship, in which all those things terminate, which we said were
objects of friendship for the sake of something else, is not at all like
those things themselves. For they, it appeared, were objects of
friendship for the sake of an object of friendship. But the primary &
real object of friendship has turned out to be in the contrary case: it
is an object of friendship on account of an object of hatred: for if
there were no objects of hatred, there would, it appears, be no objects
of friendship left.”—“It would appear so from our last argument.”—“If,
then, Evil were extirpated, should we no longer be hungry or thirsty or
any thing of that sort? Or would there still be hunger, (if there be men
& animals) but not detrimental? & likewise thirst & other desires, but
not evil desires, evil being destroyed? Or is it a ridiculous question,
what there would be or would not be in such a case; for who can tell?
But we know this, that at present it is possible to be hungry
detrimentally to ourselves, & it is also possible to be so
beneficially.”—“True.”—“And so of thirst & all other such desires: we
may have the desire beneficially, we may have it detrimentally, we may
have it neither way.”—“Certainly.”—“Now, if evil is destroyed, why
Edition: current; Page: [220] should those things which are not evil, be
destroyed with it?”—“They need not.”—“Then those desires which are
neither good nor evil, will still subsist.”—“It seems so.”—“Can we
desire, & love a thing, without its being the object of our
friendship?”—“I should think not.”—“Then if all evil things were
destroyed, there would still be some objects of friendship.”—“Yes.”—“But
if Evil were the cause of any thing’s being an object of friendship,
there could be no objects of friendship after it was destroyed: for the
cause ceasing, the effect would cease.”—“True.”—“But we had concluded,
that whatever is friendly, was friendly to some thing, & in consequence
of some thing: & we thought, that what is neither good nor evil, was
friendly to good, in consequence of evil.”—“We did.”—“But now it seems
that there is some other cause of friendship.”—“It seems so.”

“Is then, in reality, as we said just now, desire the cause of
friendship? And is that which desires, friendly to that which it
desires, at the time when it desires it? & was all the account we before
gave of friendship, mere trifling?”—“It must be.”—“But that which
desires, desires something which it is in want of.”—“True.”—“Then, that
which is wanting, is an object of friendship to that which it is wanting
to.”—“Yes.”—“But it is wanting, to that from which it is taken
away.”—“Certainly.”—“It seems then, that love, & friendship, & desire,
are for what is part of ourselves.”—“Agreed.”—“And if you two, Menexenus
& Lysis, are friends, you must be of kindred natures.”—“Granted.”—“And
if one person desires, or loves another, he would not have done so if he
had not been akin to the person he loves, either in mind, or at least in
some habit or disposition of the mind, or in form.”—“Certainly,”
answered Menexenus: but Lysis was silent.—“And we found, that what is
akin to us by nature, was necessarily an object of attachment to
us.”—“It seems so.”—“Then a genuine, & not a pretended lover, must of
necessity be an object of attachment to the person whom he loves.”—Lysis
& Menexenus with some difficulty assented, while Hippothales, says the
narrator, turned all sorts of colours with delight.

Socrates however resumed: “If kindred be not the same thing with like,
what we are now saying about friendship may amount to something: But if
kindred, & like, be the same thing, it is not easy to get rid of our
former argument, that like, quâ like, is useless to its like; & what is
useless cannot possibly be an object of friendship. Shall we therefore
concede, that kindred is not the same thing with like?”—“Yes.”—“Shall we
say, then, that Good is akin to every thing, Evil foreign to every
thing? Or is Evil akin to evil, & good to good, & what is neither, to
what is neither?”—“As you said last.”—“We have fallen back then to our
first doctrines respecting friendship, which we have rejected. For by
this account, the unjust & the wicked would be no less a friend to the
unjust & wicked, than the good to Edition: current; Page: [221] the
good.”—“So it appears.”—“If, on the other hand, we say that Good &
Kindred are the same, the good man would be the only
friend.”—“Yes.”—“But this, we thought we had refuted: do not you
remember?”—“We do.”—“What then shall we do with the argument? Nothing at
all? For if neither those who love, nor those who are loved, nor those
who are like, nor those who are unlike, nor those who are good, nor
those who are kindred, nor all the others whom we mentioned, for there
were more of them than I remember;—if none of these be an object of
friendship, I do not know what to say. Now, Lysis & Menexenus, we have
all of us made ourselves ridiculous, I, an old man, & you. For the
bystanders will report that we think we are each other’s friends, (for I
account myself as one of you) but that we have not been able to find out
what a friend is.”

And having thus as usual thrown the whole subject into a puzzle and then
laughed at himself for doing so, he breaks off.

Edition: current; Page: [222]


The Parmenides

[Holograph MS, Berg Collection, New York Public Library, entitled “Notes
on the Parmenides of Plato.” Paper watermarked 1828. Not mentioned in
JSM’s bibliography. For details concerning the manuscript and the
transcription, see the Textual Introduction, lxxxi-lxxxii above; for a
discussion of this and the other translations, see also the
Introduction, xvii-xxviii above.]

In this dialogue, Socrates is not the principal interlocutor. The
narrator is Cephalus, who professes to repeat what had been told him by
Antiphon, who himself did but repeat what had been told him by
Pythodorus, respecting a conversation carried on in the presence of this
last, between Parmenides, a Pythagorean philosopher; his disciple Zeno
of Elea, also a philosopher of reputation, said to have been the first
person who employed the dialectic method of exposition and controversy;
& Socrates, then in early youth.

The first part of this dialogue is on the subject of what Plato termed
εἴδη or ἰδέαι, which may be translated species, or sorts, or, if you
please, universals, which it appears from this & various other dialogues
of Plato, that he considered to have an objective existence. His notions
(for that they were fixed opinions in his mind is more than can be
affirmed, all that is certain being that his speculations tended that
way) were, that whenever a number of things were with propriety ranked
together under one name, in other words, formed into a class, it was on
account of some one thing, which was common to all the many things
included under the class, & which existed in them, or was in some manner
united with them all: This he called the ἰδέα, or εἰ̑δος of the class, &
supposed it to be a totally different thing from any or all of the
individual things, composing the class. Had this been all, there would
not have been much difference between his notions and those of Locke, or
any of those thinkers who have received the name of Conceptualists in
modern times,—the believers in abstract ideas. But Plato did not
consider his ἰδέα or εἰ̑δος, to be a mere thought, or mental phenomenon,
or in any way the creation of the mind. He conceived that it had an
independent existence, that it was a thing in itself, not perceptible by
the senses, but cognizable by the intellect, & which being mysteriously
united with every Edition: current; Page: [223] individual object in the
class, gave to those objects a participation of its nature which
entitled them to be ranked under the class.

The existence or non-existence of these εἴδη, appears to have been a
vexata quæstio among the philosophers anterior to Plato, and Parmenides
would seem to have maintained the negative: At least, that is the part
which he performs in this dialogue, the occasion of which is furnished
by a discourse of Zeno, read by him to the assembled company. The
subject of this discourse affords an amusing example of the unmeaning
mysticism which, in the first stage of philosophy, appears in all
nations to have been dignified with the name of wisdom. Parmenides, it
seems, had written a discourse to prove ὅτι ἕν ἐστι τὸ πα̑ν, that the
Whole, or the universe, is one. It is evident, that no one would have
supposed this proposition to convey a scientific truth, who did not
imagine, that there was some mysterious virtue in the word one. A person
who knew that general names are only, as particular names are, a mode,
tho’ a different mode, of marking individual things, would have seen,
that the word one was ambiguous, and might be applied to any number of
things collected together, for the purpose of speaking of them as
distinct from other things not included in the collection; that the same
thing, consequently, might be at the same time one, with respect to all
things external to it, and many, as respected the parts of which it was
itself composed. But to those who supposed that a thing was called a
stone because it participated of the abstract essence of a stone, that a
thing was called round, or large, or heavy because it possessed the
abstract essence of rotundity, or magnitude, or weight, & that a thing
was called one or many because it was in mysterious union with the
abstract essences of unity or of multitude, no distinction being made in
this respect between relative & absolute terms, it was not an unnatural
mistake to imagine that as one & many were opposites, the abstract
essence of unity must be incompatible with the abstract essence of
multitude, & that the same thing could not participate of both, & be,
accordingly, both one & many: by denying the possibility of which, they
were driven of course into a thousand absurdities and contradictions,
which instead of convincing them of the absurdity of the psychological
theory from which these absurdities proceeded, appear to have been
regarded by them as containing the quintessence of wisdom, and affording
a sublime exemplification of the tendency of philosophy to exalt its
votaries above the delusions of sense, & the vulgar, confined modes of
thinking of the ignorant multitude. Such at least, whether it was or was
not the opinion of Plato’s predecessors, was very firmly that of his
later followers, the Alexandrine & other Platonists, who have composed
many voluminous commentaries upon the Parmenides, in which the
self-contradictory assertions & verbal quibbles that fill the latter
part of this dialogue, & which were evidently never intended by Plato
Edition: current; Page: [224] himself to be taken seriously, are
unfolded at much length & set forth with the utmost gravity, as the
deepest & most occult truths of Ontology and Cosmology.

The work which Zeno had been reading to the company on this occasion,
was composed for the purpose of upholding the tenet of Parmenides, that
the universe is One, by shewing, that numerous contradictions would
arise if it were many. The principal of these contradictions was, that
if there were many existences, they must be at the same time like &
unlike, which he said was impossible, for what is like cannot be unlike,
nor what is unlike, like. This involves, it is easy to see, the same
want of perception of the difference between absolute & relative terms,
to which most of the absurdities which will meet us in the remainder of
this dialogue are to be ascribed. What is white cannot be black, what is
round, cannot be square, & so forth: Great & Small, Equal & Unequal,
Like & Unlike, &c. are contraries, just as much as white & black, or
round & square are; indeed much more so: Therefore, thought these
philosophers, as the same thing cannot be, at the same time, white &
black, or round & square, so it cannot be, at the same time, great &
small, equal & unequal, like & unlike: the thought never having occurred
to them that these were relative terms, & that the same thing might
therefore be great compared with a molehill, small compared with a
mountain; that the same thing might be equal to an acre, & unequal to a
square inch or mile; like to a cloud, & yet extremely unlike a whale.[*]
These obvious thoughts, as they appear to us, the notion of εἵδη which
was floating in the minds of all these philosophers, whether they
admitted it or not, precluded. That notion led them to suppose that if a
thing was great, equal, or like, it was rendered so by participating in
the nature of Magnitude, Equality, or Likeness: which being the
contraries of Smallness, Inequality, and Unlikeness, the thing in
question could not also participate in these latter essences, nor,
therefore, could it be small, unequal, or unlike. The contradictions to
which they were driven by this strange mistake will be exemplified
copiously in the sequel of the dialogue before us. From these premisses
indeed they could avowedly prove both sides, the affirmative & the
negative, of every question which they thought of discussing: & it was
in the power of demonstrating, & of believing both at once, that the
excellence of philosophy seemed to them to be peculiarly manifested.

Zeno, however, having maintained that what was like could not be unlike,
nor what was unlike, like, & that as this consequence could not be
avoided if it were allowed that there were many existences, it followed
Edition: current; Page: [225] there could be no more than one; Socrates
attempted, although modestly, & in the way of inquiry alone, to combat
this ratiocination by arguments drawn from the same notion of εἴδη, or
specific essences, more clearly expressed. He asked, “Do you not think
that there is an εἰ̑δος, or abstract essence, of likeness, & that there
is another abstract essence, that of unlikeness, which is the contrary
of it; & that you & I, & all other things, which we call Many,
participate in these; & that those things which participate of Likeness,
become in so far as they participate, Like, & those which participate of
Unlikeness, Unlike; and if all things partake of both these essences,
what wonder is it if all things are at once like & unlike? If Likeness
itself had been affirmed to be Unlikeness, or Unlikeness to be Likeness,
it would no doubt, have been absurd; but not if we say, that the things
which partake of both essences, are both like & unlike: Nor is it
wonderful, if All things* are One, by participating of Unity, and Many,
by participating likewise of Multitude: The absurdity would be, if Unity
itself were said to be Multitude, or Multitude to be Unity. The same may
be said of all other things: If the genera & species were affirmed to
unite in themselves contrary affections, I should be surprised: but what
wonder is it if the individual I be said to be at once One & Many? Many,
in the sense that my right side is different from my left, my anterior
from my hinder parts, my upper, from my lower: for I participate in
Multitude: One, in the sense, that of us seven, I am one man,
participating in Unity: so that both are true. If, therefore, any one
attempts to shew that Many & One are the same, we will say, that he
proves stones & trees & so forth to be both One & Many, which we should
all admit: not One itself to be Many, or Many One. But if any one should
take the εἴδη or specific essences by themselves, such as Likeness &
Unlikeness, Unity & Multitude, Motion & Rest, & so forth, & could shew
that these are capable of participating in the nature of each other, I
should be greatly astonished. What you have done is very well; but I
should admire much more any one who should expound the same puzzles &
difficulties in the specific essences, in the objects of intellection,
which you have expounded in those of sense.”

Parmenides hereupon called in question the whole doctrine of specific
essences, or εἴδη. “Do you think,” asked he, “that it is possible to
distinguish, as you say, the species, from the things which participate
in it? Do you suppose that there is such a thing as Likeness, distinct
from the Likenesses which exist among us; & so of Unity & Multitude, &
the like?”—“I do,” replied Socrates.—“And do you think that there are
self-existent Edition: current; Page: [226] essences or εἴδη of the
Just, the Beautiful, the Good, & so forth?”—“Yes.”—“And is there a
self-existent essence of Man, distinct from us & all other individual
men? or of Fire, or Water?”—“I have often been puzzled,” answered
Socrates, “to determine whether the same thing can be affirmed of these
last, as of the preceding.”—“And what do you say of things, which it may
seem ludicrous to allude to; hair, & mud, & filth, & every thing that is
ignoble & worthless? Do you doubt whether there is or is not a specific
self-existent essence of each of these things, distinct from what we
handle?”—“Not at all,” answered Socrates: “These things are merely what
we see them; it would perhaps be absurd to suppose that there were εἴδη
of these. I have been puzzled before now with doubts whether the
assertion is true of all things: When I come to this point, I stop
short, & run away, being afraid that I may fall into some abyss of
absurdity; I return to those things which we affirmed some time ago to
have εἴδη, & occupy myself with the consideration of them.”—“You are
young as yet,” answered Parmenides, “& philosophy has not yet possessed
you as I predict that it one day will; you will not then despise any
object as being trivial: But now, being young, you regard the opinions
of men.

“Tell me, then: You think that there are Specific Essences, which other
things participating in, are called by the specific names, e.g. those
which participate in Likeness, are like, in Magnitude, large, in Beauty
or Justice, beautiful & just.”—“Certainly.”—“Then, that which
participates in the Specific Essence, must participate either in the
whole of the Essence, or in a part of it: no third case is
possible.”—“True.”—“Does it seem to you, that the whole of the Specific
Essence, being One, exists in each of the many individuals?”—“Why should
it not be One?”—“Then, being One & the same, the whole of it exists in
many individuals separate from, & external to, one another: It must
therefore be separate and external to itself.”—“Not so,” replied
Socrates. “A day, remaining one & the same day, is in many places at
once, & yet it is not separate from & external to itself. The same may
be the case with a Specific Essence.”—“You make one & the same thing
exist in many places at once, in the same manner as if you were to
spread a sail cloth over the heads of a crowd of people, & say that One
cloth is over many men.”—“Perhaps so.”—“Would the whole cloth be over
every man, or part over one & part over another?”—“Part only.”—“Then the
Specific Essences consist of parts, & those things which participate in
them participate in a part only, & the whole of the Essence does not
exist in each individual, but only a part in each.”—“So it seems.”—“Can
you, however, say, that the One Specific Essence has parts? Having
parts, can it still be One?”—“No.”—“If you divide Magnitude, & say that
each of the many Large things which exist, is large by being endowed
with a part of Magnitude, less than Magnitude itself, will it not be
absurd?”—“It will.”—“If, Edition: current; Page: [227] again, any thing
is endowed with a part, some small part, of Equality, will it, by
possessing some thing which is less than Equality, become Equal to any
thing?”—“It is impossible.”—“And if any thing is endowed with a part of
Smallness: Smallness itself, must be larger than this part of itself:
Smallness, therefore, will be larger, & yet the thing which participates
in it, thereby becomes smaller.”—“This cannot be.”—“In what manner,
then, will things participate in the Specific Essences, since they
neither participate in the whole of them nor in their parts?”—“It is not
easy to determine.”

“Consider this likewise. What leads you to conclude that there is one
single Specific Essence of every thing, is, I suppose, this. When you
see a great number of things which are large, it seems to you, looking
at them, that there is something common to them all, a single Idea
(ἰδέα) & you therefore think that Magnitude is One.”—“Very true,”
answered Socrates.—“What do you say then, of Magnitude itself, & the
individual Great things? If you contemplate them together, does it not
seem to you that as there was something common to all the individuals,
on account of which they were called Great, which you term the Specific
Essence, so there must be something common to the Specific Essence
itself and the Individuals, on account of which they are called by the
same name?”—“So it seems.”—“Then there must be another Specific Essence
of Magnitude, besides Magnitude itself & the things which participate in
it: & still another which is common to all these, & so on: So that each
Species has not one Specific Essence only but multitudes of Specific
Essences.”—“But,” answered Socrates, “may not each of these Specific
Essences be a mere Thought, which does not exist any where but in the
mind? If so, each of them would be only One, & the consequences now
mentioned would not follow.”—“What?” answered Parmenides. “Is each of
them a Thought, & at the same time the Thought of nothing?”*—Socrates
answered, “It is impossible.”—“It is the thought of something,
then.”—“It is.”—“Of something existing, or not
existing?”—“Existing.”—“Is it not, then, the thought of some one thing
which this thought thinks about, viz. a single Idea
(ἰδέα)?”—“Yes.”—“Then this thing, common to the many individual things,
which is thought to be One, is the Specific Essence?”—“It must be.”—“Do
you not see, then, that if you affirm other things to participate in the
Specific Essences, you either suppose every thing to be made up of
thoughts, or that there can be thoughts which are thoughts about
nothing?”

Edition: current; Page: [228]
“This,” replied Socrates, “is impossible. But what occurs to me is this.
These specific essences are as it were exemplars in nature, & all other
things resemble & are copies of them: And what is called participating
in the specific essences, is neither more nor less than resembling
them.”

“If, then,” answered Parmenides, “the thing is like the specific
essence, the specific essence must be like the thing.”—“It must.”—“But
things which are alike, must participate in some one εἰ̑δος, species, or
specific essence, common to them both?”—“Certainly.”—“That, by
participating in which, things are made to resemble one another, must be
a specific essence?”—“It must.”—“The thing cannot then be like the
specific essence, nor the specific essence like the thing: Otherwise,
besides the specific essence there will be another specific essence, &
if that be like any thing, another still, & so on to
infinity.”—“True.”—“Things do not, then, participate in specific
essences by being like them; it is necessary to find some other mode of
participation.”—“It appears so.”

“You see, then,” continued Parmenides, “what difficulties arise if we
admit any self-existent essences. But these are not the greatest
difficulties which follow from that supposition. If we suppose that
every thing has one single specific essence, it would not be easy to
refute any person who might affirm that these essences were not
knowable.”—“How?”—“You, & any one who supposes self-existent specific
essences of things, would admit that none of these essences exists among
us.”—“How else could it be self-existent?”—“Then, those specific
essences which are, what they are, to each other, (or, which are
essentially relative) are relative to other specific essences, & not to
those copies of them (or whatever name we call them by) by participation
in which, the things which we perceive, are denominated, what they are.
And conversely, the things which are perceived by us, & which bear the
same name with these specific essences, are relative not to the essences
but to one another.”—“What do you mean?”—“For instance, if one of us be
a master, or a servant, he is not the servant of the specific essence
Dominion, nor the master of the specific essence servitude, but he is a
man, & the servant of a man, or a man, & the master of a man: Dominion
in itself, however, is what it is, of servitude in itself; & servitude
in itself, of dominion in itself.”—“I understand.”—“Then knowledge in
itself, is the knowledge of truth in itself; and every particular
knowledge is the knowledge of some particular thing in
itself.”—“Yes.”—“Our knowledge, however, is the knowledge of our truth;
& each of our knowledges, is the knowledge of some one of the things
which are among us.”—“True.”—“But the specific essences, you admitted,
do not & cannot be among us.”—“I did.”—“The different classes of things
in themselves are known by the specific essence of
knowledge?”—“Yes.”—“Which we have not.”—“No.”—“Then we cannot know any
of the specific essences, Edition: current; Page: [229] not being
possessed of knowledge in itself.”—“So it seems.”—“Then the Beautiful in
itself, & the Good in itself, & all the other specific essences are
unknown to us.”—“I fear so.”

“There is something still worse than this.”—“What?”—“If there is a
specific essence, of knowledge, or Knowledge in itself, must it not be
far more certain than the knowledge which we possess?”—“Yes.”—“Then if
this Knowledge can be possessed by any being, the Deity, most of all,
may be pronounced to possess it.”—“He may.”—“Then will the Deity be able
to know the things which exist among us?”—“Why not?”—“Because we
admitted that the specific essences, are referred not to the things
among us, but to each other.”—“We did.”—“Then, if the Deity has that
most exalted Dominion, & that most certain Knowledge, he does not by
that Dominion become our master, nor does he by that knowledge know us,
or any thing which is among us, nor do we by our knowledge know any
thing of the deity. The Gods, therefore, are not our masters, nor know
any thing of human affairs.”—“But it would be too strange a conclusion,
to deprive the Deity of knowledge.”—“Yet,” answered Parmenides, “all
these things must follow, if there are independent specific essences of
things, one for each species.”—“I allow it,” replied Socrates.—“But
yet,” resumed Parmenides, “if we deny that there are specific essences
of things, & that each species has one unchangeable essence, we shall
have nothing to rest upon, there will be nothing fixed, & no possibility
of discussion. This you seem to me to be still more aware
of.”—“True.”—“What then shall you do for philosophy?”—“I do not very
clearly see at present.”—“Because you begin too early to define &
distinguish the Beautiful in itself, the Just in itself, the Good in
itself, & the other species, before having sufficiently exercised your
intellect. The impulse which urges you to speculation is noble & divine,
but you should while you are young, strengthen your faculties by what is
thought to be worthless, & is called by the multitude disputation,*
otherwise the truth will escape you.”—“What is this exercise which you
recommend?”—“That which you have heard from Zeno. I however approve of
what you said before, that the subject proposed in these exercises
should not be visible or perceptible things, but those which are most
comprehensive & most to be considered as specific essences.”—“For it
seems to me,” answered Socrates, “to be not difficult to shew in this
manner, that things are either like or unlike, or any thing
else.”—“True,” answered Parmenides. “And it is right not only to suppose
that a thing is true, & see what consequences flow from that hypothesis,
but also to suppose the same thing to be false, & see the consequences
of that supposition also, for better exercise.”—“How?”—“For instance, if
you make this Edition: current; Page: [230] supposition which Zeno made,
that there are many existences, & see what will in that case follow with
regard to these many, as respects themselves & as respects Unity, & to
Unity as respects itself & as respects the many: Then again, if there
are not many existences, see again what will follow with respect to
Unity & to the many, as respects themselves & each other: And then
again, suppose that Likeness exists, or does not exist, & see what
follows in either case: & the same of motion & rest, generation &
corruption, & even existence itself & non-existence. In a word, whatever
you suppose to exist or not to exist, or to be affected in any other
way, you must observe what happens to it as respects itself & other
things, & other things as respects themselves & as respects it, if you
wish to go through a complete course of mental gymnastics, & be capable
of discovering the truth.”

The whole party now joined in requesting Parmenides to give them a
specimen of the intellectual gymnastics which he recommended, & he being
at last induced to comply, & determining to take Unity, the subject of
his own dissertation, for the subject also of his discourse, presented
them, in the way of question and answer, with the following series of
verbal quibbles.

“The first supposition is, that Unity exists. If it exists, it cannot be
Many. Therefore it cannot have parts, nor consequently be a whole: for a
whole, is that of which none of the parts are wanting, consequently what
has no parts is not a whole; & what has parts, is many & not one. Unity
therefore is not a whole, & has no parts. But a beginning, middle & end
are parts, therefore it has no beginning, middle, or end. But the
beginning & the end of a thing are its bounds; therefore it is
boundless. And it has no shape. For it can neither be round nor
straight; since the meaning of round, is having its extremes in all
directions equally distant from the middle: & the meaning of straight,
is, having the middle directly between the two extremes: whether
therefore Unity were round or straight, it must have parts, & be not one
but many. It therefore has no shape. Nor is it in any place. For it is
neither in itself nor in any thing else. If it were in any thing else,
it would be surrounded by that in which it is, & would touch it in many
directions: which that which is one, & indivisible, & not circular,
cannot do. And if it were in itself it would surround itself; for it is
not possible for a thing to be in any thing which does not surround it.
But the thing which surrounds & that which is surrounded must be
different; for one & the same thing cannot all of it do both these
things. So that unity by this account would be not one but two. It
therefore is neither in itself nor in any thing else, & consequently is
nowhere. And it neither moves nor is at rest. For the only kinds of
motion, are, locomotion & change. If it were changed, it would no longer
be itself, and therefore no longer unity. If it underwent locomotion it
must either revolve about itself Edition: current; Page: [231] in the
same place, or change its place: That which revolves about itself must
have a centre & parts which move round the centre; but Unity has no
parts: That which changes its place, comes from one thing into another.
Now we have seen that Unity cannot be in any thing. It consequently can
still less come into it. For that which is coming into a thing, must be
not yet entirely in it, nor entirely out of it: that is, it is partly
in, & partly out; therefore it must have parts. That which has no parts,
& is not a whole, can neither be partly, nor wholly in a thing,
therefore it cannot be coming into it, nor, therefore, can it change its
place. In every way, therefore, Unity is immovable. But we said, that it
cannot be in any place. Therefore it cannot be in the same place. For it
if was in the same place, that place must be some place, & it would be
in a place. Therefore Unity is never in the same place. But what is
never in the same place is not at rest. Therefore Unity is neither in
motion nor at rest. Moreover, it is not the same with itself nor with
any thing else, nor different from itself or from any thing else. For if
it were different from itself, it would be different from Unity, & would
not be Unity: If it were the same with any thing else, it would be that
something else, & would not be itself, Unity: It cannot be different
from any thing else: for it is Unity; & it is not by Unity, but by
Difference, that one thing differs from another: It is not, therefore,
different from any thing else by being Unity; but if not by being Unity,
not by being itself: & if not by being itself, not at all. Neither can
it be the same with itself: for the nature of Unity, is not the nature
of Sameness: A thing which becomes the same with any thing, does not
thereby become One; for if it became the same with many, it would become
many, not one: If however Unity & Same did not differ from each other,
whenever any thing became the same, it would become one, & when it
became one, it would become the same. If therefore Unity were the same
with itself, it would not be one with itself, it would be Unity & not
Unity, which is absurd. Unity therefore is neither the same with itself
nor with any thing else, nor different from itself nor from any thing
else. Neither is it like nor unlike to itself or to any thing else. For
like, means, having the same attributes: but Unity, & Same, we found,
were distinct: And if Unity had any attributes besides that of being
One, it would be more things than one, which is impossible: It has not
therefore the same attributes with itself nor with any thing else, &
consequently is not like itself nor any thing else. Neither however can
Unity have different attributes: for so likewise it would be more things
than one; But that which is unlike any thing, is that which has
different attributes from it: Consequently Unity is not unlike itself
nor any thing else: therefore it is neither like nor unlike. Further, it
is neither equal nor unequal to itself nor to any thing else. For that
is equal to another thing, which contains the same measure the same
number of times. That is greater or less, among commensurables, which
Edition: current; Page: [232] contains the same measure a greater or a
less number of times; among incommensurables, which contains a greater
or a less measure, the same number of times. Now, that which does not in
any way participate in Sameness, cannot contain the same measure; it
therefore cannot be equal to itself or to any thing else: That which
contains any measure a greater or a less number of times, has that
number of parts, & therefore is not Unity, but that particular number:
If it contains the measure only once, it is equal to its measure; which
we have seen to be impossible. Unity therefore not only is not equal,
but it is not greater or less than itself, or than any thing else.
Again, it cannot be older, or younger, or of the same age. For that
which is of the same age either with itself or with any thing else,
participates of equality (viz. equality of time), and of likeness; which
unity does not. But we also said, that Unity does not participate of
unlikeness or inequality: how therefore can it be older, or younger,
than any thing? Unity therefore cannot be in time. For that which is in
time, is perpetually becoming older than itself. But that which is
older, is older than something which is younger: Therefore, becoming
older than itself it becomes younger than itself, or it would not have
any thing to become older than: For as that which is the one, of any two
correlatives, is it of something which is the other, so that which has
been, or is about to be, or comes to be, i.e. becomes the one, has been
or is about to be or becomes it of something which has been or is about
to be or becomes the other. Whatever, therefore, is in time, has always,
(as of course it must have,) the same age with itself, & is always
becoming older & younger than itself. But Unity has none of these
attributes. Therefore it does not participate in time, nor is in any
time. But was, & came to be, & has come to be, & was coming to be, &
will be, & will come to be, & is, & comes to be, all express
participation of past, future, or present time. Since therefore Unity
does not participate of time, it never came to be, nor ever was, nor now
is, nor comes to be, nor ever will be or come to be. It therefore in no
way participates of existence, nor in any way can it be said to be. It
cannot therefore even be said to be Unity: for that would be, to be.
Unity therefore is not Unity, & is not at all. But there cannot be any
thing of or concerning that which is not. There is therefore no name of
it, nor discourse of it, nor knowledge, nor perception, nor opinion.
Unity therefore is neither named, nor spoken of, nor thought of, nor
known, nor does any creature perceive it.”

Parmenides here recommences, & proceeds to demonstrate by equally cogent
arguments the direct contraries of these assertions. Having here shewn
that if there is such a thing as Unity it neither is the one nor the
other of a variety of contradictories, he now shews that if there is
such a thing it is both.

“If there be such a thing as Unity, it must participate of Existence.
There Edition: current; Page: [233] must be therefore an Existence of
Unity, existence not being the same thing with unity. For, if it were
the same thing there could not be an Existence of Unity, nor could Unity
participate of Existence; to say Unity exists, & Unity is Unity, would
have been the same thing: But we are not deducing the consequences of
the supposition that Unity is Unity, but that Unity exists. Existence, &
Unity, therefore are different. Now, from this, if we suppose that Unity
exists, we shall find that it has parts. For it follows that there is
such a thing as One Being; of which Unity, & Existence are two
attributes, not being identical with each other: One Being, therefore,
must be a whole, Unity & Existence its parts. But each of these parts is
predicable of the other part: for Unity Exists, & existence is one. Each
of the parts therefore is again divisible with the same parts, & so on
for ever, since Unity has always the attribute of Existence & Existence
that of Unity; wherefore, becoming always two, it is never one. Unity
therefore is infinite in multitude. But even if we consider Unity by
itself, without that of which we have said that it participates, we
shall find that it is many. For if it participates of existence, without
being existence, its existence must be one thing, & itself, another. But
if existence, & Unity, are different, Unity is different from Existence
not by being Unity, nor Existence from Unity by being Existence, but by
being Other, & Different. Difference is not the same thing with Unity,
or Existence. We may use the term both, in speaking of Difference &
Unity, or of Difference & Existence, or of Unity & Existence; we may
therefore use the word two. But when there are two, each of them must be
one. Each of these therefore is one, & all together consequently they
make three. But if there is two, & three, there is twice, & thrice,
since two is twice one, & three, thrice one. If there is two, & twice,
there is twice two, & in short there are all numbers, & all numbers are.
But if number is, multitude is, & participates of existence. But if
number in the aggregate participates in existence, each part of it does
so. Existence, therefore, may be predicated of all things, great &
small, forming a multitude. Existence therefore is divided into great &
small parts, infinite in number. But each of these parts, as it cannot
be no part, must be one part. Unity, therefore, is predicable of every
part, great or small, of existence. It, therefore, being one, is in many
places. But it cannot be wholly in each of these places. It therefore is
divisible, & into an infinite number of parts. Not only, therefore One
Being is many, but One, or Unity without the Being, is so. But as the
parts are parts of a whole, Unity must be bounded by that whole: for the
whole must comprehend all the parts. Unity, therefore, is one, & many, a
whole & parts, bounded & infinite. But if it is bounded, it has
extremities: if it is a whole, it has a beginning, middle, & end; for if
any of these are taken away, it would no longer be whole. But the middle
must be at an equal distance from the extremes, or it would not be the
middle. Edition: current; Page: [234] Unity therefore has some kind of
shape. It also is both in itself & in something else. For all the parts
must be in the whole, & none of them out of it: But all the parts taken
together, are Unity, & the whole is Unity: it therefore is in itself.
But the whole cannot be in the parts, either in all of them or in any
one: for if it is in all, it must be in one, else how could it be in
all? but it cannot be in one or any number, else the greater would be in
the less: but if it is neither in one nor in several nor in all of its
parts, it must be in something else, or not be any where. But if it were
not any where it would not be any thing. In so far, therefore, as it is
a whole, it is in something else: In so far as it is the aggregate of
its parts, it is in itself. Again, it is both in motion & at rest. For
if it is in itself, it must be at rest; for being in One, & never going
out of it, it is always in the same place, & therefore is at rest: But
as it is always in a different thing, it can never be in the same thing
& consequently is not at rest, but in motion; As therefore it is always
in itself & always in a different thing, it is always both in motion &
at rest. Further, it is the same with itself, & different from itself, &
the same with other things, & different from them: For every thing must
be to another in one of four ways: it must be the same; or different; or
if it be neither the same nor different, it is either a part of the
other or the other is a part of it. Now Unity is not a part of itself;
neither therefore is itself, a part of it. And it is not different from
itself. Therefore it must be the same with itself. But that which is in
a different place from itself, must be different from itself: now this
is the case with Unity which, as we have seen, is both in itself & in
something else; Unity, therefore, is different from itself. But whatever
is different, is so from something which is different from it. Those
things therefore which are not Unity, are different from Unity, & Unity
is different from them. Unity, therefore, is different from other
things. But Sameness & Difference are contraries: Sameness therefore
cannot ever reside in what is Different, nor Difference, in what is the
Same: If however Difference cannot reside in what is the same, it cannot
be in any thing for any time; for if it were, it would, during that
time, be in the Same. Difference therefore never is in any thing,
consequently neither in Unity nor in other things: Unity therefore
cannot be different from Other things nor other things from Unity, by
Difference; & if not by Difference, certainly not by themselves;
therefore not at all. Unity, therefore, is not different from other
things. But other things do not participate in Unity, otherwise there
would be a sort of Unity in them, & they would not be Other things: Nor
are Other things a number; for having number, they could not be entirely
without participation in Unity. And other things are not parts of Unity;
for so too they would participate in it; nor is Unity, a part of them;
for the same reason. But that which is neither different from another,
nor is to it as a part to the whole or as a whole to a part, must be the
same. Unity, therefore, is Edition: current; Page: [235] the same with
other things. It is therefore the same with itself & with other things,
& different from itself & other things.”

It is unnecessary to adduce more than a specimen of this mode of
enquiry. By similar processes of reasoning to the foregoing it is
proved, that Unity is both like & unlike, to itself & to other things;
that it touches itself & other things, & does not touch them; that it is
equal to itself & to other things, & likewise greater than itself & than
other things, & likewise less; that it participates in time, & is & is
always becoming older than itself & other things, & younger, & of the
same age; & finally, that since it participates in time, it is capable
of pastness, presentness, & futurity, it is, has been, & will be, it
does come, has come, & will come to be, & there consequently may be
knowledge, opinion, perception, naming, & discourse of it: in short, the
contradictories of all the propositions which were proved before.

It would not seem very easy to find still another way of applying these
same predicates to this same subject: this however is done: “If Unity is
neither one nor many, and participates in time, it must, since it is
unity, participate sometimes of existence, & since it is not, sometimes
not participate in it. It is impossible that it should at the same time
participate & not participate. Therefore, it must participate in
existence at one time, & not participate in it, at another. There must
therefore be a time at which it comes into existence, & another at which
it goes out of existence. But the one of these is to be generated, the
latter to be destroyed. Unity therefore is capable of generation &
destruction. Again, being both One & Many, when it becomes One it ceases
to be Many, when Many it ceases to be One; it is therefore divided &
reunited. When it becomes like it ceases to be unlike, when unlike to be
like: It therefore is assimilated & unassimilated. When it becomes
greater, equal or less, it is increased, equalized, & lessened. In the
same manner it is shewn, that since it moves & is at rest, & cannot do
both at once, it changes from motion to rest. But in this case it is for
an instant neither in motion nor at rest, but between both.” This happy
idea throws light upon the previous examples, & it may be said with
equal reason, that while changing from One to Many it is neither one nor
many, & therefore is neither divided nor reunited; & in the same manner,
the contradictories of the assertions previously made, may be proved:
that in the transition from one of its attributes to another, it is not
assimilated nor unassimilated, increased, equalized or diminished, as
the case may be. “All this,” Parmenides resumed, “will be true of Unity,
if there be such a thing as Unity.”

He then proceeds to enquire, “If there be such a thing as Unity, what
will happen to Other things. Since they are Other than Unity, Unity
cannot be Other things. But neither are they entirely deprived of Unity,
but participate of it in some sort: for they must have parts, otherwise
they would be Edition: current; Page: [236] only one, or Unity: These
parts, must be parts of a whole: That whole, must be one: for if a thing
was a part of many of which itself was one, it must be a part of itself,
which is impossible, & also a part of each of the rest; since if there
was one which it was not a part of, it would be a part not of all of
them but of all except that one. A part, therefore, must be a part of
some one thing, composed of all the parts which we term a whole. If
Other things, therefore, have parts, they partake of unity & of
totality, & are One complete whole having parts. The same must be the
case with each of the parts: it too must participate in Unity. For when
we say each, we denote some one thing, distinguished from the rest, &
standing by itself. But it will participate in Unity, without being
Unity, for nothing but Unity itself can be Unity. Both the whole,
therefore, & the part, participate in Unity, being different from Unity.
But what are different from Unity, must be many, for if they were
neither one nor more than one, they would be nothing. They must, even,
be infinite in number. For, when they come to participate in unity, they
do so, not being unity nor yet participating in it. They are therefore a
multitude, in which there is no unity. Take therefore the smallest part
of this multitude, & even this part, as unity is not in it, is multitude
& not unity. Other things, therefore, are infinite in multitude. But
when each part of this multitude becomes a part, & therefore
participates in unity, it becomes bounded by the whole & by the other
parts, & the whole becomes bounded by the parts. Other things,
therefore, when they come to participate in Unity, become bounded—but in
their own nature they are boundless. They are therefore bounded, &
boundless. They are also like & unlike, to themselves & to one another:
Like, inasmuch as they are all boundless in their nature, & all
participate in limitation: but in so far as they are bounded &
boundless, they are contrarily affected, & therefore unlike to
themselves & to each other. In like manner they may be shewn to be the
same with, & different from each other, to be in motion & at rest, & in
short in every respect contrarily affected.

“Again, to recommence. When we have said, Unity & Other things, we have
said all. There is no third thing, in which both Unity & Other things
may be. Unity, & Other things, therefore, are never in the same thing,
they are consequently apart. Unity moreover has no parts. It therefore
is not in Other things, nor is it the whole of which they are parts;
since it is completely apart from them, & is indivisible. Other things
therefore can in no respect participate in Unity, neither wholly or
partially. Other things therefore are not one: neither are they many:
for if so, each of them would be a part of the whole, which would be
one. Not having unity in them, they cannot be two, nor three, nor any
other number. Neither are other things like nor unlike to Unity, nor
have they in themselves, Likeness or Unlikeness; for if they had, here
would already be two; & that cannot participate Edition: current; Page:
[237] in two, which does not participate in one. In like manner, Other
things are neither the same nor different, in motion nor at rest,
Generated or Destroyed, Greater, Equal, or Less. For if they are any of
these, they would participate in One, two, & three. If, therefore,”
(concludes Parmenides) “there is such a thing as Unity, all things are,
& are not, One.”

He now puts the contrary hypothesis, that there is no such thing as
Unity, or that Unity is not. He concludes, first, that if it is not, it
must be a subject of knowledge, otherwise it would not be known what is
meant when we say that it is not. Next, Other things must be different
from it & it from them: It consequently has the attribute of difference;
& (as he continues to shew) that of unlikeness (to other things) & of
likeness (to itself) and of inequality (for if it were equal to other
things, it must exist) & therefore of greatness and smallness, since
inequality consists of these parts: But if it has these two things, it
must have what is between them, viz. equality. It must even have
existence in some sort, since we affirm that it is a non-entity, in
which the affirmation that it is, is contained. And since it has, both
existence and non-existence, it must change: & change is motion: it
therefore moves. But it likewise does not move. For as it does not
exist, it is in no place; it therefore cannot change one place for
another, & is not susceptible of progressive locomotion: Nor of rotatory
locomotion; for that is to move in the same place: But the same, is
something which exists, & Unity, we suppose, does not exist, & therefore
cannot be in any thing which does exist. Nor is it capable of change;
for if it were changed, it would no longer be the thing we are talking
of, viz. unity. It therefore does not move; & is consequently at rest.
It therefore is both in motion & at rest. He proceeds to shew, that it
is changed & not changed, generated & destroyed, & not generated or
destroyed: All this on the supposition that it does not exist.

He then recommences, & proves the contradictories of these propositions:
That if Unity is not, it does not in any way partake of existence, nor
of generation & destruction, nor of change, nor of motion nor rest, nor
of greatness, littleness or equality, nor of likeness or unlikeness, nor
of sameness or difference, nor of pastness, presentness nor futurity, &
that there can be no knowledge or opinion or perception or naming or
discourse of it, & finally that it can have no attributes: All which
follows clearly enough from its non-existence.

He next enquires, if Unity does not exist, what becomes of Other Things.
If they are other, they are different: if different, different from
something: Not from unity, since that does not exist: from each other
therefore. But they cannot differ from each other one by one, since
there is no one: but multitude by multitude; each cluster being really
infinite in multitude, however small it may appear; but each of them
seems to be one, though it is not. From this he concludes, that the
clusters will seem to have number, Edition: current; Page: [238] that
there will seem to be a smallest cluster, that each larger cluster will
seem to be equal to the sum of several smaller ones, so that there will
be an apparent equality among the clusters, & an apparent beginning,
middle, & end, but looking closer we shall see that there is another
beginning before the beginning, an end after the end, & a middle more
middle than the middle, so that they will seem bounded on a hasty,
boundless on a closer view. In like manner he shews that Other things
would appear both One, & Many, both Like & Unlike, both the same with, &
different from each other, separate & in contact, in motion & at rest,
generated & destroyed, & so forth.

He then recommences, & says, “Other things are not Unity: neither are
they Many, for to constitute many there must be one. There is therefore
neither Unity nor Multitude; & as both are non-entities, there can be no
semblance or opinion of them, for we cannot think of a non-entity: If
therefore Unity is not, no Other thing can be thought to be either one
or many. In like manner,” says he, “Other things cannot either be, or
seem to be like or unlike, the same or different, separate or in
contact, nor any of the things just enumerated, unless Unity exists. And
finally if Unity do not exist, nothing exists.”

He sums up the results by saying, “It therefore appears, that whether
Unity exists or not, Unity & Other Things are & are not, & seem & seem
not, as respects themselves & each other, in every way whatever.”

Thus ends this singular dialogue: on the purpose of which, much
difference of opinion has existed and does exist. The first, or
controversial part of it, may be considered as a tolerably fair
statement of the arguments for and against the existence of εἴδη or
abstract essences of species, as they occurred to Plato. The concluding
part, in which Parmenides exhibits the specimen of his mental
gymnastics, as he terms it, may perhaps have been seriously designed for
that end, to which it is scarcely necessary to observe that it is not at
all adapted, since it accustoms the mind not to detract & discard, but
to cherish & be led, by the ambiguities of language. If, on the other
hand, it be intended as a jeu d’esprit, to ridicule the subtleties of
the sophists, it is certainly very well suited to that purpose. The
chief argument against this view of the intention of the dialogue, is
that we occasionally find subtleties of the same kind in works of Plato
which cannot possibly have been written with any purpose of ridicule:
though nowhere do we find them in the singular shape or to the
remarkable extent which is the character of the Parmenides.

Edition: current; Page: [239]


TWO PUBLICATIONS ON PLATO
 1840

Edition: current; Page: [240]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London and Westminster Review, XXXIV (Sept., 1840), 489-91, where it
appears under “Classical Literature” in the section devoted to “Critical
and Miscellaneous Notices”; headed: “Plato: The Apology of Socrates, the
Crito, and part of the Phædo; with Notes from Stallbaum, and
Schleiermacher’s Introductions [Ed. William Smith].—A Life of Socrates,
by Dr. G. Wiggers. Translated from the German, with Notes. Both
published by Taylor and Walton. [London,] 1840.” Not republished: signed
“A.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A short notice of two
publications on Plato, in the Miscellaneous Notices of the Westminster
Review for Sept. 1840. (No 67)” (MacMinn, 52). No copy in the Somerville
College Library.

For comment on the essay, see the Textual Introduction, lxxxiii above.

Edition: current; Page: [241]


Two Publications on Plato

the youth of this country, who are accustomed to devote so large a
portion of the time employed in education to the partial and imperfect
acquisition of the learned languages, have hitherto received little
encouragement to attend to any but the least useful parts of ancient
literature; and school-books intended to facilitate the study of even
the easier parts of the writings of Plato are still almost a desideratum
among us. This deficiency the little publications now under review, so
far as they go, are a laudable attempt to supply. The portions of Plato
which are selected are those which are, on reasonable grounds, believed
to contain the authentic particulars of the trial, last days, and dying
moments of Plato’s great master, Socrates. To these the editor has not
only added the introductions which that great scholar and divine,
Schleiermacher, prefixed to them in his translation of Plato’s works,
but has also published in a separate volume a short life of Socrates, by
a Dr. Wiggers, of Rostock. This piece of biography is interesting,
because whatever relates to Socrates must be so; but Dr. Wiggers cannot
be denied to be somewhat of a “Philistine,” as well as (what was less to
be expected) occasionally at fault in his knowledge of Athenian
institutions. Thus he represents the Council of Five Hundred as the
product of popular election, whereas it was really chosen by lot. This
oversight leads Dr. Wiggers to undervalue the undeviating consistency of
purpose, characteristic of Socrates. To have held any office which was
the result of election would have been inconsistent with his avowed
principle of abstinence from public affairs; while to accept and
discharge functions which devolved upon him by lot, and were therefore
compulsory, was the necessary consequence of that other principle no
less rigidly adhered to by him, of inflexible obedience to the laws; a
principle of which his refusal to make his escape from prison (the
subject of the Crito) was so noble an example. Whoever knows what
Grecian society was (or indeed any society consisting of an active and
spirited people, in an imperfect state of the social union) is well
aware that lawlessness, in such a society, is the prevailing mischief,
the great moral and political danger to be combated against; and that
the duty of obedience to lawful authority, even when unjustly exercised,
is a principle to the assertion of which the best of men might not
unworthily make the voluntary sacrifice of that life, which he had
already perilled in Edition: current; Page: [242] opposition to the very
same power when illegally exerted, and which he was so often called upon
to lay down at the same bidding for the comparatively petty interest of
some frontier dispute.

To Dr. Wiggers’s rather meagre and by no means philosophical
performance, the editor has added the life of Socrates by Diogenes
Laertius, in the original Greek, and a reprint of Schleiermacher’s
excellent dissertation “On the Worth of Socrates as a Philosopher,”
translated (and originally published in the Philological Museum)[*] by
the Rev. Connop Thirlwall, whom we may now with exultation designate as
Bishop Thirlwall. The editor’s own notes, though sparing in number and
for the most part only quotations, are not the least valuable part of
the book. We cannot help quoting from one of them a noble passage of the
great historian Niebuhr, in vindication of the Athenian Demos. For the
translation of this passage the English public are also indebted to
Bishop Thirlwall, whose History of Greece[†] is throughout conceived in
a kindred spirit:

Evil without end may be spoken of the Athenian constitution, and with
truth; but the common-place stale declamation of its revilers would be
in a great measure silenced, if a man qualified for the task should
avail himself of the advanced state of our insight into the
circumstances of Athens, to show how even there the vital principle
instinctively produced forms and institutions by which, notwithstanding
the elements of anarchy contained in the constitution, the commonwealth
preserved and regulated itself. No people in history has been so much
misunderstood, and so unjustly condemned as the Athenians; with very few
exceptions, the old charges of faults and misdeeds are continually
repeated. I should say, God shield us from a constitution like the
Athenian! were not the age of such states irrevocably gone by, and
consequently all fear of it in our own case. As it was, it shows an
unexampled degree of noble-mindedness in the nation, that the heated
temper of a fluctuating popular assembly, the security afforded to
individuals of giving a base vote unobserved, produced so few
reprehensible decrees; and that, on the other hand, the thousands among
whom the common man had the upper hand, came to resolutions of such
self-sacrificing magnanimity and heroism, as few men are capable of
except in their most exalted mood, even when they have the honour of
renowned ancestors to maintain as well as their own.

I will not charge those who declaim about the Athenians as an incurably
reckless people, and their republic as hopelessly lost, in the time of
Plato, with wilful injustice, for they know not what they do.[‡] But
this is a striking instance how imperfect knowledge leads to injustice
and calumnies; and why does not every one ask his conscience, whether he
is himself capable of forming a sober judgment on every case that lies
before him; a man of candour will hear the answer in a voice like that
of the genius of Socrates. Let who will clamour and scoff; for myself,
should Edition: current; Page: [243] trials be reserved for my old age,
and for my children, who will certainly have evil days to pass through,
I pray only for as much self-control, as much temperance in the midst of
temptation, as much courage in the hour of danger, as much calm
perseverance in the consciousness of a glorious resolution which was
unfortunate in its issue, as was shown by the Athenian people,
considered as one man. We have nothing to do here with the morals of the
individuals: but he who, as an individual, possesses such virtues, and
withal is guilty of no worse sins in proportion than the Athenians, may
look forward without uneasiness to his last hour.

The ancient rhetoricians were a class of babblers, a school for lies and
scandal; they fastened many aspersions on nations and individuals. So we
hear it echoed from one declamation to another, among the examples of
Athenian ingratitude, that Paches was driven to save himself by his own
dagger from the sentence of the popular tribunal. How delighted was I
last year to find, in a place where no one will look for such a
discovery, that he was condemned for having violated free women in
Mitylene at its capture. The Athenians did not suffer his services in
this expedition, or his merit in averting an alarming danger from them,
to screen him from punishment.

The fathers and brothers who, in the epigraph of the thousand citizens
who fell as freemen at Chæronea, attested with joy that they did not
repent of their determination, for the issue was in the hands of the
gods, the resolution the glory of man,—who conferred a crown of gold on
the orator[*] by whose advice the unfortunate attempt had been made
which cost them the lives of their kinsmen, without asking whether they
were provoking the resentment of the conqueror,—the people who, when
Alexander, fresh from the ashes of Thebes, demanded the patriots,
refused to give them up, and chose rather to await his appearance before
their walls,—who, while all who flattered or feared Philip warned them
not to irritate him, condemned citizens to death for buying slaves that
had fallen into the hands of the Macedonians by the capture of Greek
cities which had been hostile to Athens; the people whose needy
citizens, though predominant in the assembly, renounced the largess
which alone afforded them the luxury of flesh on a few festivals, though
on all other days throughout the year they ate nothing but olives,
herbs, and onions, with dry bread and salt fish,—who made this sacrifice
to raise the means of arming for the national honour;—this people
commands my whole heart and my deepest reverence. And when a great man*
turned away from this noble and pliable people, though certainly it did
not appear every day in its holiday clothes, and was not free from sins
and frailties, he incurred a just punishment in the delusion which led
him to attempt to wash a blackamoor white; to convert an incorrigible
bad subject like Dionysius, and through his means to place philosophy on
the throne in the sink of Syracusan luxury and licentiousness; and in
the scarcely less flagrant folly of taking an adventurer so deeply
tainted with tyranny as Dion, for a hero and an ideal. A man who could
hope for success in this undertaking, and despaired of a people like the
Athenians, had certainly gone great lengths in straining at gnats and
swallowing camels.[†]

Edition: current; Page: [244] Edition: current; Page: [245]


BAILEY ON BERKELEY’S THEORY OF VISION
 1842, 1843

Edition: current; Page: [246]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Dissertations and Discussions, II (1867), 84-119, which reprints two
articles from the Westminster Review, XXXVIII (Oct., 1842), 318-36, and
XXXIX (May, 1843), 491-4, both signed “A.” The first, which has “Bailey
/ On Berkeley’s Theory of Vision” as running-titles, is headed: “Art.
II.—A Review of Berkeley’s Theory of Vision, designed to show the
Unsoundness of that Celebrated Speculation. By Samuel Bailey, Author of
‘Essays on the Formation and Publication of Opinions.’ &c. [London:]
Ridgway, 1842.” The second, which has “Mr. Bailey’s Reply to / The
Westminster Review” as running-titles, is headed: “Art. IX.—A Letter to
a Philosopher, in Reply to some recent Attempts to vindicate ‘Berkeley’s
Theory of Vision,’ and in further Elucidation of its Unsoundness. By the
Author of ‘A Review of Berkeley’s Theory of Vision,’ ‘Essays on the
Formation and Publication of Opinions,’ &c. [London:] Ridgway, 1843.” In
reprinting them in D&D, JSM gives, in footnotes to the titles, reference
to the original publication of the reviews, and repeats (minus publisher
and dates) the information of the original headings; he also gives the
second the title here used, “Rejoinder to Mr. Bailey’s Reply.”
Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A review of Bailey’s ‘Review of
Berkeley’s Theory of Vision’ in the Westminster Review for October 1842
(No. 75),” and “A review of Bailey’s ‘Letter to a Philosopher respecting
Berkeley’s Theory of Vision’; in the Westminster Review for May 1843
(No. 77).” (MacMinn, 55, 56.) There are no alterations or corrections in
the copy of the first article in the Somerville College Library; in the
copy of the second, an inked correction of “an” to “our” is made (see
267n-n).

In the footnoted variants (all of which derive from the two articles in
the Westminster), “67” indicates D&D, II (2nd ed., 1867), “59” indicates
D&D, II (1st ed., 1859), “43” indicates the second Westminster article,
and “42” the first. For comment on the composition of the essays and
related matters, see the Introduction and the Textual Introduction,
xlv-lvii and lxxxiii-lxxxv above.

Edition: current; Page: [247]


Bailey on Berkeley’s Theory of Vision

the doctrine concerning the original and derivative functions of the
sense of sight, which, from the name of its author, is known as
“Berkeley’s Theory of Vision,”[*] has remained, almost from its first
promulgation, one of the least disputed doctrines in the most disputed
and most disputable of all sciences, the Science of Man. This is the
more remarkable, as no doctrine in mental philosophy is more at variance
with first appearances, more contradictory to the natural prejudices of
mankind. Yet this apparent paradox was no sooner published, than it took
its place, almost without contestation, among established opinions; the
warfare which has since distracted the world of metaphysics, has swept
past this insulated position without disturbing it; and while so many of
the other conclusions of the analytical school of mental philosophy, the
school of Hobbes and Locke, have been repudiated with violence by the
antagonist school, that of Common Sense or innate principles, this one
doctrine has been recognised and upheld by the leading thinkers of both
schools alike. Adam Smith, Reid, Stewart, and Whewell (not to go beyond
our own island) have made the doctrine as much their own, and have taken
as much pains to enforce and illustrate it, as Hartley, Brown, or James
Mill.

This general consent of the most contrary schools of thinkers in support
of a doctrine which conflicts alike with the natural tendencies of the
mind, and with the peculiar ones of the larger half of the speculative
world, certainly does not prove the doctrine true. But it proves that
the reasons capable of being urged in behalf of the doctrine, are such
as a mind accustomed to any sort of psychological inquiry must find it
very difficult to resist. If the doctrine be false, there must be
something radically wrong in the received modes of studying mental
phenomena. It is difficult to imagine that so many minds of the highest
powers, so little accustomed to agree with one another, should have been
led (the majority in opposition to the whole leaning and direction of
their scientific habits) into this rare and Edition: current; Page:
[248] difficult unanimity, by reasonings which are a mere tissue of
paralogisms and ignorationes elenchi.

Such, however, is the thesis which Mr. Bailey, in the volume before us,
has undertaken to defend; and Mr. Bailey is one who, on any subject on
which he thinks fit to write, is entitled to a respectful hearing. He is
entitled on this occasion to something more—to the thanks which are due
to whoever, in the style and spirit of sober and scientific inquiry,
calls in question a received opinion. The good which follows from such
public questioning is not indeed without alloy. It fosters scepticism as
to the worth of science, and by creating difference where there
previously was agreement, enfeebles the authority of cultivated
intellects over the ignorant. But, on the other hand, such a break in
the line of scientific prescription applies a wholesome stimulus to the
activity of thinkers; it counteracts the tendency of speculation to grow
torpid on the points on which general agreement has apparently been
attained; and by not permitting philosophers to take opinions upon trust
from their predecessors or from their former selves, constrains them to
recal their attention to the substantial grounds on which those opinions
were first adopted, and must still be received.

If the result of this re-examination be unfavourable to the received
opinion, science is happily weeded of a prevailing error; if favourable,
it is of no less importance that this too should be shown, and the
dissentient, if not convinced, at least prevented from making converts.
It is for the interest of philosophy, therefore, that a bold assault, by
a champion whom no one can despise, upon one of the few doctrines of
analytical psychology which were supposed to be out of the reach of
doubt, should not be let pass without a minute examination and
deliberate judgment.

It is necessary to begin by a clear statement of the doctrine which Mr.
Bailey denies; especially as we think that an indistinct mode of
conceiving and expressing the doctrine is the source of most of his
apparent victories over it.

The theory of vision, commonly designated as Berkeley’s, but in fact the
received doctrine of modern metaphysicians, may be stated, then, as
follows.

Of the information which we appear to receive, and which we really do,
in the maturity of our faculties, receive through the eye, a part only
is originally and intuitively furnished by that sense; the remainder is
the result of experience, and of an acquired power. The sense of sight
informs us of nothing originally, except light and colours, and a
certain arrangement of coloured lines and points. This arrangement
constitutes what are called by opticians and astronomers apparent
figure, apparent position, and apparent magnitude. Of real figure,
position, and magnitude, the eye teaches us Edition: current; Page:
[249] nothing; these are facts revealed exclusively by the sense of
touch; but since differences in the reality are commonly accompanied by
differences also in the appearance, the mind infers the real from the
apparent in consequence of experience, and with a degree of accuracy
proportioned to the correctness and completeness of the data which
experience affords.

Further, those coloured appearances which are called visual or apparent
position, figure, and magnitude, have existence only in two dimensions;
or, to speak more properly, in as many directions as are capable of
being traced on a plane surface. A line drawn from an object to the eye,
or, in other words, the distance of an object from us, is not a visible
thing. When we judge by the eye of the remoteness of any object, we
judge by signs; the signs being no other than those which painters use
when they wish to represent the difference between a near and a remote
object. We judge an object to be more distant from us by the diminution
of its apparent magnitude, that is, by linear perspective; or by that
dimness or faintness of colouraand outlinea which generally increases
with the distance,b in other words by aërial perspective.

Thus, then, the powers of the eyesight are of two classes, its original
and its acquired powers; but the things which it discovers by its
acquired powers seem to be perceived as directly as what it sees by its
original capacities as a sense. Though the distance of an object from us
is really a matter of judgment and inference, we cannot help fancying
that we see it directly with our eyes; and though our sight can of
itself inform us only of apparent magnitudes and figures, while it is
our mind which from these infers the real, we believe that we see the
real magnitudes and figures, or what we suppose to be so, not the
apparent ones. A mistake occasioned by that law of the human mind (a
consequence and corollary of the law of association) whereby a process
of reasoning, which from habit is very rapidly performed, resembles, so
closely as to be mistaken for, an act of intuition.

But although opposed to first impressions and common apprehension, the
doctrine in question is confirmed by a great mass of common experience.
Visible objects, seen through a clear atmosphere, as travellers in
southern countries never fail to remark, seem much nearer to us; because
they are seen with less diminution of their customary brightness, than
has generally been the case at that distance in our previous experience.
A known object, seen through a mist, seems not only farther off, but
also larger than usual—a most convincing instance; for in this case the
visual magnitude of the object, depending on the size of its picture on
the retina, remains exactly the same; but from the same apparent size we
infer a larger Edition: current; Page: [250] real size, because we have
first been led by the dimness of the object to imagine it farther off,
and at this greater distance there is need of a larger object to produce
the same visual magnitude. So powerful, however, is the law of mind, by
virtue of which a rapid inference seems to be an intuition, that when we
look through a mist we cannot hinder ourselves from fancying that we
actually see things larger; although their visual magnitude, which alone
even Mr. Bailey contends that we see, remains, and must remain,
precisely the same.

Again, where we have no experience, our eyesight gives us no information
either of distance or of real magnitude. We cannot judge by the eye, of
the distance of the heavenly bodies from us, nor does any one of them
appear nearer or farther off than another; because we have no means of
comparing their brightness or their apparent magnitude as it is, with
what it would be at some known distance. As little do we fancy we can
judge by the eye of the magnitudes of those bodies; or if a child
fancies the moon to be no larger than a cheese, it is because he forgets
that it is farther off, and draws from the visual appearance an
inference, which would be well grounded if the moon and the cheese were
really at an equal distance from him.

Our purpose, however, in this place, was not to illustrate or prove the
theory, but to state it. In a few words, then, it is this: That the
information obtained through the eye consists of two things—sensations,
and inferences from those sensations: that the sensations are merely
colours variously arranged, and changes of colour; that all else is
inference, the work of the intellect, not of the eye; or if, in
compliance with common usage, we ascribe it to the eye, we must say that
the eye does it not by an original, but by an acquired power—a power
which the eye exercises, through, and by means of, the reasoning or
inferring faculty.

This is the “Berkeleian Theory of Vision,” accurately stated; and this
statement of it comprises the essence of that to which the subsequent
schools of psychology have unanimously assented.

But with the doctrine in this simple form we cannot find that Mr. Bailey
has in any one instance really grappled. He has gone back to the
primitive phraseology in which the theory was propounded by Berkeley and
his immediate successors; men to whom the glory belongs of originating
many important discoveries, but who seldom added to this the easier, yet
still rarer, merit, of expressing those discoveries in language
logically unexceptionable. No one can read the metaphysicians of the
last two centuries, especially those of our own country, without
acknowledging that (with one or two exceptions, among whom the great
name of Hobbes stands preeminent) the very best of them are often
wanting either in the determinateness of thought, or the command over
language, which would make their words express shortly, precisely, and
unambiguously, the very thing they Edition: current; Page: [251] mean.
Accordingly, there are few of the great truths of psychology which are
not, in almost all writings antecedent to the present century, wrapped
up in phrases more or less equivocal and vague, through which
onecpersonc may clearly see what is really within, but another, of
perhaps equal powers, will, in the words of Locke, instead of “seizing
the scope” of the speculation, “stick in the incidents.”[*]

Upon such vague phrases Mr. Bailey has wasted his strength, never
placing the truth which they represented plainly and unambiguously
before his mind; and he imagines himself to have triumphed over the
doctrine, while he has been kept from contact with it by a rampart of
words which he himself has helped to raise.

One of the principal of these phrases is Perception, a word which has
wrought almost as notable mischief in metaphysics as the word Idea. The
writer who first made Perception a word of mark and likelihood in mental
philosophy was Reid, who made use of it as a means of begging several of
the questions in dispute between himself and his antagonists. Mr.
Bailey, with, we admit, good warrant from precedent, has throughout his
book darkened the discussion, by stating the question, not thus:—What
information do we gain, or what facts do we learn, by the sense of
sight? but thus:—What do we perceive by the eye, or what are our
perceptions of sight? The word seems made on purpose to confuse the
distinction between what the eye tells us directly, and what it teaches
by way of inference; and we shall presently see how completely, in our
author’s case, the cause has produced its effect.

It is in the first section of his second chapter that the author enters
upon his argument; and in this he inquires whether “outness” (as it is
termed by Berkeley) is “immediately of itself perceived by sight?”[†]—in
other words, whether we naturally, and antecedently to experience, see
things to be external to ourselves.

Berkeley alleged that to a person born blind, and suddenlydenabledd to
see, all objects would seem to be in his eye, or rather, in his mind. It
would be a more correcteversione, however, of the theory, to say that
such a person would at first have no conception of in or out, and would
only be conscious of colours, but not of objects. When by his sense of
touch he became acquainted with objects, and had time to associate
mentally the objects he touched with the colours he saw, then, and not
till then, would he Edition: current; Page: [252] begin to see objects.
Or, adopting Mr. Bailey’s summary statement of Berkeley’s views,

Outness is not immediately of itself perceived by sight, but only
suggested to our thoughts by certain visible ideas and sensations
attending vision. . . . By a connexion taught us by experience, visible
ideas and visual sensations come to signify and suggest outness to us,
after the same manner that the words of any language suggest the ideas
they are made to stand for.[*]

To this Mr. Bailey replies, that the law of mind by which one thing
suggests another, cannot produce any such effect as the one here
ascribed to it. If we have had an internal feeling A, at the same time
with an external sensation B, and this conjunction has occurred often,
the two will in time suggest one another: when the internal feeling
occurs, it will bring to mind the external one, and vice versâ. But
Berkeley’s theory, he says, demands more than this. Berkeley maintains
that because the internal feeling has been found to be accompanied by
the external one, it will, when experienced alone, not only suggest the
external sensation, “but absolutely be regarded as external itself, or
rather, be converted into the perception of an external object;”[†]—just
as if one were to assert that the sound “rose,” by suggesting the
visible flower, became itself visible. “It may be asserted,” says Mr.
Bailey, “without hesitation, that there is nothing in the whole
operations of the human mind analogous to such a process:”[‡] and it may
be asserted as unhesitatingly that Berkeley’s theory implies no such
absurdity.

The internal feeling which, when received by sight, becomes a sign of
the presence of an external object, is a sensation of colour. Does
Berkeley pretend, or is it a fact, that this sensation is ever regarded
as external? Certainly not. What we regard as external is not the
sensation, but the cause of the sensation—the thing which by its
presence is supposed to give rise to the sensation: the coloured object,
or the quality residing in that object, which we term its colour.
Berkeley is not, as Mr. Bailey supposes, bound to show that the
sensation of colour is “converted into the perception of an external
object,” since nobody is bound to prove a proposition which nobody can
understand. Expressed in unequivocal language, what Mr. Bailey calls the
perception of an object is simply a judgment of the intellect that an
object is present. Berkeley is not called upon to show that the
sensation of colour can be “converted” into this judgment, because his
theory requires no such conversion. It requires that the judgment should
follow as an inference from the sensation, and Berkeley is bound to show
Edition: current; Page: [253] that this is possible. And this he can do,
since there is no law of mind more familiar than that by which, when two
things have constantly been experienced together, we infer from the
presence of the one the presence of the other.

Thus it is, that from using the obscure word “perception” instead of the
intelligible words “sensation” and “judgment” or “inference,” our author
leaves his antagonist unanswered, and triumphs over a shadow. It is true
that Berkeley and Berkeley’s adherents have set him the example of this
misleading phraseology. But Mr. Bailey lives in a more accurate age, and
should use language more accurately.

In the second section (we pass over some observations in the first, to
which the answer is obvious) the author proceeds to inquire whether we
naturally see things at different distances, or whether our perception
by the eye of distance from us, results (as Berkeley contends) from an
association, formed by experience, between the usual signs of distance,
and ideas of space originally derived from the touch.

And here Mr. Bailey has to confute an assertion of Berkeley, that
“Distance of itself and immediately cannot be seen. For distance being a
line directed endwise to the eye, it projects only one point in the fund
of the eye, which point remains invariably the same, whether the
distance be longer or shorter;”[*] or, as Adam Smith has completed the
expression of the idea, the distance of an object from the eye “must
appear to it but as one point.”[†]

It is not easy to comprehend how the meaning of this argument can be
unintelligible, we do not say to a person of Mr. Bailey’s acquirements,
but to any one who knows as much of optics as is now commonly taught in
children’s books. Our author, however, professes himself unable to
understand it, but surmises that it proceeds on the fallacy of supposing
that we “see the rays of light”[‡]fthatf come from the object,gwhichg it
is evident we do not.

The argument supposes no such thing. The argument is this. We cannot see
anything which is not painted on our retina; and we see things alike or
unlike, according as they are painted on the retina alike or unlike. The
distance between an object to our right and an object to our left is a
line presented sideways, and is therefore painted on our retina as a
line; the Edition: current; Page: [254] distance of an object from us is
a line presentedhendwaysh, and is represented on the retina by a point.
It seems obvious, therefore, that we must be able, by the eye alone, to
discriminate between unequal distances of the former kind, but not of
the latter. Unequal lines drawn across our sphere of vision, we can see
to be unequal, because the lines which image them in the eye are also
unequal. But the distances of objects from us are represented on our
retina in all cases by single points; and all points being equal, all
such distances must appear equal, or rather, we are unable to see them
in the character of distances at all.

This argument, which involves no premises but what all admit, does
positively prove that distance from us cannot be seen in the way in
which we see the distances (or rather apparent distances) of objects
from one another, namely, by the original powers of the sense of sight.
Berkeley’s argumenti proves conclusively that distance from the eye is
not seen, but inferred. It cannot be seen as other things are seen,
because it projects no image on the retina; it must be seen indirectly,
that is, not seen, but judged of from signs,—namely, from those
differences in the appearance of an object, whether in respect of
magnitude or colour, which are physically consequent upon its being at a
greater orj a smaller distance.

And here, so far as concerns one principal part of the question at
issue, the argument might close. It is demonstrated that the distance of
an object is not “perceived” directly, but by means of intermediate
signs; not seen by the eye, but inferred by the mind. And this is not
only the most essential, but the only paradoxical part of Berkeley’s
theory.

It is true, there remains a supposition which our author may adopt, and
which, from occasional expressions, itkmightk be concluded that he is
willing to adopt. He may give up the point of actually seeing distance,
and admitting that we do not see it, but judge of it from evidence, he
may maintain that the interpretation of that evidence is intuitive, and
not the result of experience. He may say that we do not see an object to
belfartherl off, but infer it to be so from its looking smaller; not,
however, because we have heretofore observed that such is the case, but
by a natural instinct, which precedes experience, and anticipates its
results.

There are thus two possible forms of our author’s doctrine. He may
affirm that we are apprised of distance through the eye, by actually
seeing it; or he may say with Berkeley,[*] that remoteness is not seen,
but inferred from paleness of colour and diminution of apparent
magnitude,—but may differ from him by asserting that the inference is
instinctive, instead of the slow result of gradual experience. The
former doctrine is demonstrably Edition: current; Page: [255] false; the
latter not so; it may perhaps be refuted, but cannot be taxed with
absurdity.

mThem author, however, from the imperfect way in which he has conceived
the question, seems never to have finally made his choice between these
two suppositions.* When he draws near to close quarters (he never comes
quite close), and is compelled to express himself with a nearer than
usual approach to precision, his languagepseems to implyp that the
perception of distance from us is not a process of sense, but an
instinctive inference of the mind. But he cannot have consciously
elected this doctrine, to the exclusion of the other, or he would
scarcely make the large use he does, for confirming his theory, of its
supposed conformity to the “universal impressions of mankind.”[*] To
those natural impressions his doctrine, thus understood, is as repugnant
as Berkeley’s. Mankind, when they use their eyesight to estimate the
distance of an object, do not fancy themselves to be interpreting signs;
they are not conscious that they are judging by the apparent smallness
of the object, and by the loss of brilliancy which it sustains from the
intervening atmosphere. If their unreflecting opinion goes for anything,
it goes to prove that we actually see distance; for they are unaware of
any difference between the process of seeing the distance of the tree
from the house, and seeing the distance of the house from their eye.

If the author, abandoning his claim toqhaveq common prejudices on his
side, should finally acquiesce in the opinion that what he calls our
perception of nearness and remoteness by the eye, is an instinctive
interpretation of those variations in colour and apparent magnitude
which really do accompany varieties of distance; his doctrine will then
lie open to only one objection—the superfluousness of assuming an
instinct to account for that, which knowledge derived from experience
will so well explain. Long before a child gives evidence of
distinguishing distances by the eye with any approach to accuracy, he
has had time more than enough to learn from experience the
correspondence between greater distance to the outstretched arm, and
smaller magnitude to the eye. At any age at which a child is capable of
forming expectations from past experience, he must have had experience
of this correspondence, and must have learnt to ground expectations upon
it.r

Edition: current; Page: [256]
Mr. Bailey next takes notice of the argument which Berkeley’s followers
have drawn from the effect of pictures; from the fact that things may be
so represented on a flat surface as to deceive the sight. They conclude
from this, that though we appear to see solidity, we in truth only infer
it from signs; because we equally appear to see it when the solidity is
no longer present, provided the signs are. This argument, therefore,
aims at proving no more than that what we call seeing solidity is
inferring solidity, a proposition which, as we have already observed,
our author could afford to admit. Nevertheless, he understands this
argument no better than he understood the one which preceded it. He says
it is “Virtually arguing that because planes can be made to look solid,
solid objects are originally seen plane. . . . Solid objects, they say,
must be originally seen as plane, because they may be delineated on a
plane surface so as to lookssolid:”[*] whichs, as he justly says, would
be an unwarranted inference.

But Mr. Bailey misconceives the scope of the argument to which he
fancies that he is replying. The fact that a plane may be mistaken for a
solid, is not urged to show that a solid must, but only that it may, be
seen originally as a plane. Since even a plane, so coloured as to make
the same image on the retina which a solid wouldtmaket, is mistaken for
a solid, without doubt an actual solid will beurecognised asu such, even
if it be seen in no other manner than as the plane is. The fact that we
recognise a solid as a solid, is no proof that so far as the mere eye is
concerned we do not see it as a plane; since a picture, which
isvcertainlyv seen only as a plane, is yetwtaken forw a solid, and
appears to the person himself to be seen as such.

We proceed to another of our author’s arguments.[†] If it were true, he
says, that we originally see all objects in a party-coloured plane, but
afterwards find by experience that this visual appearance is uniformly
connected with a tangible object, we should indeed associate the two
ideas, but this subsequent association would not alter the original
perception. If we before saw a party-coloured plane, we should continue
to see it. Though the idea of a tangible object would be uniformly
suggested, the impression of sight which suggested it would in no wise
be changed. As no touching or handling can make us see the images in a
mirror to be on the surface, but we cannot help seeing them beyond it,
so if all objects, near and remote, appeared to the sight to be at the
same distance, all the touching or feeling in the world could not make
us see them to be at various distances.

Here, again, the author has permitted a set of indefinite phrases to
Edition: current; Page: [257] intercept his view of the position which
he has undertaken to subvert. It is quite true that no association
between the sight and the touch will ever make us see anything that the
eyesight has not the power of showing us. If we originally see only a
party-coloured plane, no touching or handling will ever make us see
anything more. But touching and handling may well make us infer
something more; and, according to Berkeley’s theory, this is all it
needs to do. The very pith and marrow of the theory is, that what Mr.
Bailey calls seeing things at various distances is, in truth, inferring
them to be so, and that neither at first nor at last do we actually see
anything but the colours.x Berkeley, therefore, is under no necessity of
affirming that experience or association alters the nature of our
perceptions of sense. All that belongs to sense, according to him,
remains the same; what experience does is to superadd to the impression
of sense an instantaneous act of judgment.

In what we have already written we have answered the essential part of
so much of our author’s argument, that we may forbear to follow him into
the various modes of statement by which he endeavours to adapt his
refutation to the varieties of Berkeley’s language. The same radical
misconception pervades them all—that of representing Berkeley as
pretending that a conception derived from touch is actually transmuted
into a perception of sight. It is still, as before, the word perception
which disguises from our author the point in issue. He cannot see that
what he calls a perception of sight is simply a judgment of the
intellect, inferring from a sensation of sight the presence of an
object. The idea of an object, being an idea derived from touch, ideas
of touch are the foundation of this judgment of the intellect; but it is
not therefore necessary to consider them as being, in any sense whatever
of the term, “transmuted,” either into a judgment or into a perception.

Mr. Bailey’s next argument is the statement of a psychological fact,
which, as a fact, is correct, and a necessary completion and explanation
of the theory with which he imagines it to conflict. According to
Berkeley’s doctrine, says Mr. Bailey,[*] what takes place when we appear
to ourselves to see distance, is merely a close and rapid suggestion of
tangible distance, called up by certain visual appearances or signs; and
the mind (as is its custom) does not dwell upon the sign, nor remember
even the next minute that precise appearance of the object, which
indicated the distance, but rushes at once from the sign to the thing
signified. And accordingly, a person learning to draw, finds it very
difficult to recall accurately the visual Edition: current; Page: [258]
appearance, or, even when the scene is before his eyes, to imitate on
paper the apparent positions and figures, without ever altering them by
the substitution of the real ones. So inveterate is the habit of
neglecting the sign and attending only to the thing signified, that it
is a hard and difficult task to delineate objects as we see them; our
tendency is always to delineate them as we know them to be.

Now, if these doctrines be true, argues our author—if visible
appearances are mere signs, which the mind rapidly glides over, and
hurries to the tactual perceptions with which they are associated, we
ought surely to be very distinctly conscious of the tactual
reminiscences supposed to be thus suggested. Yet the fact is, that when
we look at objects, and judge of their positions and distances, we have
so little consciousness of any tactual ideas, that it is almost
questionable whether any are suggested at all. It is, in fact, with
great difficulty that we recall this particular class of tactual
impressions. Our ideas of tangible distance, form, and magnitude,
instead of being peculiarly distinct, are peculiarly vague and shadowy;
for the simple reason, that we are not in the habit of attending to
those particular sensations of touch. And accordingly, our consciousness
testifies that when we correct an erroneous visual impression of
distance, we do so by comparing and collating it, not with tactual
impressions, but with visual impressions received under different
circumstances. When, in looking along an avenue of trees, the more
remote of the trees appear to my eye to be close together, and when I
correct this impression, and judge them to be farther apart than they
appear, the thought which I recall is not the idea of a tangible space,
but the recollection of the visible space which I saw intervening
between them on some nearer view, or which I have seen to lie between
the adjacent trees of other similar avenues.

In this argument, to which we have endeavoured to do no injustice in the
mode of stating it, the facts alleged are indisputable. It is true that
our ordinary processes of thought and judgment respecting outward
objects are carried on, not by means of tactual ideas, but of visual
ideas which have acquired a tactual signification; and that this
extensive supersession of the function of tactual ideas renders many of
them dim, confused, and difficult to be recalled. But these facts, in
themselves interesting and worthy of notice, are of no avail to prove
that the visual ideas, which thus become our main symbols of tangible
objects, have their tactual signification naturally, or obtain it from
any other source than experience. At the age at which a child first
learns that a diminution in brightness and in apparent magnitude implies
increase of distance, the child’s ideas of tangible extension and
magnitude are not faint and faded, but fresh andyvigorousy. As for the
Edition: current; Page: [259] subsequent fact, that when the suggesting
power of the sign has been often exercised, our consciousness not only
of the sign itself, but of much of what is signified by the sign,
becomes much less acute, so accomplished a metaphysician as Mr. Bailey
cannot be ignorant that this is the nature of all signs. It will not,
for example, be asserted that the words of any language are significant
by nature, or derive their power of suggesting ideas from any cause but
association alone; yet nothing can be more notorious than that a word
with which we are very familiar, is heard or uttered, and does its work
as a sign, with the faintest possible suggestion of most of the sensible
ideas which compose its meaning. For example, the word “country:” a
politician may reason, or an orator may expatiate, with the utmost
cogency and effect, on the interests of the country, the prospects of
the country; but in doing this have they distinctly present to the
mind’s eye the cornfields and meadows, the workshops and farmhouses, the
thronged manufactories and family circles, which are the real concrete
signification of the word? Assuredly not: words, as used on common
occasions, suggest no more of the ideas habitually associated with them,
than the smallest portion that will enable the mind to do what those
common occasions require; and it is only to persons of more than
ordinary vividness of imagination, that the names of things ever recall
more than the meagrest outline of even their own conceptions ofzthez
things.

Now if this be true of words, which are conventional signs, it is not
less true of natural signs, such as our sensations of sight, which
derive their power of suggestion not from convention, but from always
occurring in conjunction with the things which they suggest. When once
the visual appearances, from long experience, suggest the tactual
impressions with extreme readiness and familiarity, it would be contrary
to all we know of association to suppose that they will continue to
suggest them with the original vivacity and force. As the mind, without
attending to the sign, runs on to the thing signified, so does it also,
without attending to the thing signified, run on to whatever else that
thing suggests. Those vivid sensations of the touch and of the muscular
frame from which the infant learned his first ideas of distance, would,
when the necessity has ceased for actively attending to them, be more
and more dimly recalled, while enough only would be distinctly suggested
to enable the mind to go on to what it has next to do. The amount of
distinct suggestion, and its precise nature, probably differ in
different individuals; and in each the visual sign suggests, not so much
the tangible distance, as the measure by which, with that person,
tangible distances are accustomed to be estimated. In our own experience
we should say, that when we look at an object to judge of its distance
from Edition: current; Page: [260] us, the idea suggested is commonly
that of the length of time, or the quantity of motion, which would be
requisite for reachingatoa the object if near to us, or walking up to it
if at a distance.

The indistinctness, therefore, of our ideas of tactual extension and
magnitude, and the fact of our carrying on most of our mental processes
by means of their visual signs, without distinctly recalling the tactual
impressions upon which our ideas of extension and magnitude were
originally grounded, is no argument against Berkeley’s theory, but is
exactly what, from the laws of association, we should expect to happen
supposing that theory to be true. And our author has failed, by this as
much as by his other arguments, to strike an effective blow at the
theory.

We may here close our examination of the controversial, and properly
argumentative part of the book. The remainder of it is an attempt to
show, by actual observation, that distances are distinguished by the eye
before there has been time to form any association between the sight and
the touch, and even before the sense of touch has been sufficiently
exercised to be capable of yielding accurate ideas.

The facts adduced are of three kinds: relatingbeitherb to human infants,
to the young of the lower animals, or to persons born blind, and
afterwardscrendered capable ofc sight.

Our author’s facts relating to human infants are singularly
inconclusive. They are chiefly intended to show that the sense of sight
in a child is developed earlier than the sense of touch, because a child
recognises persons and objects by the sight, when his expertness in
using his hands so as to acquire tactual ideas is still of the very
lowest order. From this Mr. Bailey infers, or seems to infer, that the
infant judges of objects by the sense of sight, before he has sensations
of touch whereby to judge of them. It is singular that so able a thinker
should not have adverted to the fact, that the child may experience
sensations of touch from two sources, namely, either from the objects
which he touches, or from those which touch him. A childd six months old
is not very skilful in handling objects so as to acquire an accurate
notion of their distance and shape; but persons and things are
continually touching the child, and seldom without his experiencing
simultaneously some peculiar visual appearance. It cannot, therefore, be
long before he associates at least those contacts which are pleasurable
or painful, with the corresponding visual sensations; and when this
association is formed, he will, on seeing the visual appearances, give
signs of intelligence; not from recognising the object, for as an object
there is not a shadow of proof that he yet recognises it, but simply
because the sensation of sight excites the expectation of the accustomed
pleasure or pain. That anything beyond this takes place in an infant’s
mind at an age at which it has Edition: current; Page: [261] not yet
acquired tactual notions of distance and magnitude, Mr. Bailey has not
proved, and would find it difficult to prove.

The facts relating to the young of the lower animals are more to the
point, and have been long felt to be a real stumbling-block in the way
of the theory.

It is manifest, [says Mr. Bailey,] by the actions of many young animals,
that they see external objects as soon as they are born, and before they
can possibly have derived any assistance from their powers of touch or
muscular feeling. The duckling makes to the water as soon as it has left
its shell; the lamb moves about as soon as dropped; the young turtles
and crocodiles, says Sir Humphry Davy, hatched without care of parents,
run to the water; the crocodile bites at a stick, if it be presented to
it, the moment it is hatched.[*]

Again,

Their running about, their snatching at objects presented to them as
soon as born, their seeking the teats of the dam, their leaping from one
spot to another with the greatest precision, all show not only that they
can see objects to be at different distances, but that there is a
natural consent of action between their limbs and their eyes; that they
can proportion their muscular efforts to visible distances.[†]

It is asserted, and we know of no reason to doubt the fact, that
chickens will pick up corn without difficulty as soon as they are
hatched.

These are strong facts, and though we cannot confirm them from our own
knowledge, still, as they are denied by no one, we presume they must be
received as unquestionable. Some of the strongest adherents of
Berkeley’s doctrine, particularly Dugald Stewart and Brown,[‡] have felt
compelled by these facts to allow, that, in many of the lower animals,
the perception of distance by the eye is connate and instinctive. In
this admission these philosophers saw no inconsistency, it being an
acknowledged truth that brutes have many instincts, of which man is
reduced to supply the place by acquired knowledge. Mr. Bailey, however,
goes further, and says, here is proof that the eye is at least an organ
capable of a direct and intuitive perception of distance.[§] Here,
therefore, is at all events a complete refutation of Berkeley, who
asserts that such a direct perception is organically impossible.[∥]

This is one of the passages whichelook as if our author hade never quite
settled with himself whether the “perception of distance” by the eye is
a real function of that organ, or is that very process of interpreting
visible signs Edition: current; Page: [262] which Berkeley contends for,
except that it is instinctive instead of being the result of experience.
It is against the former hypothesis only thatfthe argument of Berkeley,
which Mr. Bailey refers to,f is directed. To refute him, therefore, it
would be necessary to show, not only that animals can distinguish
distance as soon as they are born, but that they distinguish it by the
sight itself, and not by interpretation of signs. Yet the other
hypothesis is the one which, in order to treat our author fairly,
wegwereg obliged to suppose him to adopt.

If the eye of a brute is a different kind of organ from a human eye,
there is no reasoning from one to the other; brutes may be capable of
seeing distance and solidity, and yet this will be no reason for
supposing that men are capable. But if in a brute, as in a man, it be a
necessary condition of vision that an image corresponding to the
objecthshouldh be formed on the retina, then in a brute, as in a man, it
is impossible that two lines should seem of unequal length, which are
both alike represented on the retina by points. There will be no
resource either in man or beast for judging of remoteness, except from
difference in the degrees of brightness and of visible magnitude; and
the only doubt will be whether these natural signs are interpreted
instinctively, or by virtue of previous experience.

Now if brutes have really an instinct for interpreting these
appearances,—if they are intuitively capable of drawing, without
experience, the inferences which experience would warrant—we allow it is
physiologically probable that some vestige of a similar instinct exists
in human beings; although, as in many other cases, the instinctive
property, which might perhaps be observable in idiots, is overruled and
superseded by the superior force of that rational faculty which grounds
its judgments upon experience. But in truth, our knowledge of the mental
operations of animals is too imperfect to enable us to affirm positively
that they have this instinct. We know to a certain extent the external
acts of animals, but know not from what inward promptings, or on what
outward indications, those acts are performed. For example, as a
judicious critic in the Spectator newspaper has remarked, some of the
motions which are supposed to show that young animals can see distance
immediately after birth, are performed equally by those which are born
blind; kittens and puppies seek the teat as well as calves and lambs.[*]
We are not aware if the experiment was ever tried whether a blind
duckling will run to the water; it would not be more surprising than
many facts in the history of the lower animals which are well known to
be true. Those animals have to us an inexplicable facility both of
finding and of selecting the objects which their wants require, Edition:
current; Page: [263] without, as far as we can perceive, any sufficient
opportunities of experience. But it is a question which we should like
to see examined by a good observer, to what extent it is their eyesight
which guides them to the performance of theseiwonders.i At all events,
man has not these same facilities; man cannot build in hexagons by an
instinctive faculty, though bees can.

We do not wish to evade a question which we are unable to solve, or to
blink the fact that the case of the lower animals is the most serious
difficulty which the theory of Berkeley has to encounter. But we
maintain that it is a difficulty only, not a refutation; and that, even
granting the full extent of what is contended for, the theory would
still be practically true for human beings. Mr. Bailey allows that
infants do not manifest that early perception of distance which some
animals do; he imputes this, plausibly enough, to the comparative
immaturity of their organs at the period of birth.[*] But before the
time when, according to him, the organs have attained sufficient
maturity for manifesting this original power, experience has furnished
impressions and formed associations, which, without supposing any such
power, will account for all which the eyes can do in the way of
observation; and there is ample evidence that our judgments of outward
things from visual signs are practically, throughout life, regulated by
these acquired associations.

The facts which relate to young children and the young of the lower
animals being disposed of, there remain those derived from persons born
blind, and relieved from blindness at a mature age. These, if well
authenticated, would be the most valuable facts of all, for the human
species. They exhibit to us, in the very act of learning to see, not
children or brutes, but persons capable of observing and describing
their impressions, and whose judgments of objects from touch are already
accurate and steady. It is a disagreeable reflection, to how great an
extent these rare and valuable opportunities have been lost; how
slightly and carelessly cases so interesting to science have been
observed, and how scanty and insufficient is the information which has
been recorded concerning them.

The best known case, that of the youth who was couched by Cheselden,[†]
has always been deemed strongly confirmatory of Berkeley’s doctrine. Mr.
Bailey has however attempted, we cannot think with any success, to
maintain the contrary. Cheselden’s patient said that all objects seemed
to touch his eyes, as what he felt did his skin. There has been much
discussion (in which our author takes an active part)[‡] as to what the
boy Edition: current; Page: [264] may have meant by touching his eyes;
we think quite needlessly. That the objects touched him was obviously a
mere supposition, which he made because it was with his eyes that he
perceived them. From his experience of touch, perception of an object
and contact with it were, no doubt, indissolubly associated in his mind.
But he would scarcely have said that all objects seemed to touch his
eyes, if some of them had appeared farther off than others. The case,
therefore, as far as anything can be concluded from one instance, seems
to prove completely that we are at first incapable of seeing things at
unequal distances. Our author curiously argues that the boy might have
expressed himself as he did without regarding all visible objects as
equally near; for, says he, the boy compared his visual impressions to
impressions of touch, and we do not consider all tangible objects as
equally near. True, we do not; but if we were to say that all objects
seemed simultaneously to touch our hand, it would require some ingenuity
to reconcile this assertion with the fact that we were, at that very
moment,jperceivingj them to be at different distances from it.

Another specimen of our author’s power of explaining away evidence, is
to be found in his remark, that in the whole of Cheselden’s narrative
“There is nothing from which we can learn or infer—not a whisper of
evidence to prove—that the boy’s subsequent perceptions of visible
distance had been acquired by means of the touch.”[*]

What thinks Mr. Bailey of this passage, quoted by himself:

He knew not the shape of anything, nor any one thing from another,
however different in shape or magnitude; but upon being told what things
were, whose form he before knew from feeling, he would carefully
observe, that he might know them again; but having too many objects to
learn at once, he forgot many of them; and (as he said) at first he
learned to know, and again forgot, a thousand things in a day. One
particular only, though it may appear trifling, I will relate. Having
often forgot which was the cat, and which the dog, he was ashamed to
ask; but catching the cat (which he knew by feeling), he was observed to
look at her steadfastly, and then, setting her down, said, “So, puss, I
shall know you another time.”[†]

Mr. Bailey willknot wish tok shelter himself under the subterfuge that
the process of learning to see, which Cheselden here so graphically
describes, has reference to form only, and not to distance. Cheselden
exhibits the boy actively engaged in teaching himself by the touch to
judge of forms by the eye; and in this process he could not avoid
learning also to judge of distances: much more rapidly, indeed, than of
forms, the ideas concerned being much simpler.

After this example, the reader may dispense with our entering into the
details of five other cases which our author discusses. Some of these
cases Edition: current; Page: [265] are more, others less, favourable in
appearance to Berkeley’s theory; but, as our author himself remarks,
they all bear evidence that the observers were not duly aware of the
psychological difficulties of the problem. The point which Mr. Bailey
most dwells on as conclusive in his favour, is that two of the patients
could distinguish by the unassisted eye whether an object was brought
nearer or carriedlfartherl from them.[*] This, indeed, would be decisive
of the question, if the experiments had been fair ones. But in one of
these cases the patient was of mature years, and the trial not made till
the eighteenth day after the operation, by which time a middle-aged
woman might well have acquired the experience necessary for
distinguishing so simple a phenomenon. In the other of the two cases,
the patient, a boy seven years old, had been capable, before the
operation, of distinguishing colours “when they were very strong and
held close to the eye;”[†] and had probably, therefore, had the capacity
of observing, antecedently to the operation, that colours grow fainter
when the coloured object is removed further off.

On the whole, then, it will probably be the opinion of
themphilosophicalm reader, that neither by his facts nor by his
arguments has Mr. Bailey thrown any new light upon the question, but has
left Berkeley’s Theory precisely as he found it, subject, as it has
always been, to the acknowledged difficulty arising from the motions of
young animals, but otherwise unshaken, and to all appearance
unshakeable.

* * * * *

Mr. Bailey having published a reply* to the preceding criticism, it is
right to subjoin the following


REJOINDER TO MR. BAILEY’S REPLY

in this pamphlet Mr. Bailey replies to our article of last October, and
to a paper in Blackwood’s Magazine on the same subject.[‡] Between Mr.
Edition: current; Page: [266] Bailey and the writer in Blackwood we are
not called upon to interfere. Of what he has said in answer to our own
comments, our respect for him, as well as the scientific interest of the
subject, compel us to take some notice; but we cannot venture to inflict
upon our readers that detailed analysis of his arguments which would be
necessary to satisfy him that we had duly considered them. We prefer
resting our case on what we have already written, and on a comparison
between that and what is offered in reply to it. We are really afraid
lest in any attempt to state the substance of Mr. Bailey’s arguments, we
should unwittingly leave out something which perhaps forms an essential
part of them; so little do we feel capable of comprehending what it is
which gives them the conclusiveness they possess in his eyes. And it is
the more desirable that the reader should not take our word respecting
Mr. Bailey’s opinions, as it appears that on one important point we
have, in sheer love of justice and courtesy to Mr. Bailey,
misrepresented them.

We remarked that a dissentient from Berkeley’s doctrine might adopt
either of two theories; he might assert that we actually see distance,
which is one doctrine; or he might admit that we only infer the distance
of an object, from the diminution of its apparent size and apparent
brilliancy, but might say that this inference is not made from
experience, but by instinct or intuition. We surmised that Mr. Bailey
was in a state of indecision between these two theories, but with a
leaning towards the latter. In this it seems we were wrong, for he not
only holds steadily to the former of the two doctrines, but finds it
“inexplicable how any one of honesty and intelligence” could so far
misunderstand him as to imagine otherwise, “except on the supposition of
greater haste than was compatible with due examination.”[*] We can
assure Mr. Bailey that our mistake—since mistake it was—arose solely
from an honest desire to do him justice. Of the two opinions, we, in all
candour, attributed to him the one which appeared to us least
unreasonable, and most difficult satisfactorily to refute. It would have
abridged our labour very much if we had thought ourselves at liberty to
ascribe to him the opinion he now avows. That opinion we thought, and
continue to think, palpably untenable, being inconsistent with admitted
facts, while the other, from the nature of the case, can only be
combated by negative evidence.

The notion that distance from the eye can be directly seen, needs, we
conceive, no other refutation than Berkeley’s. We can see nothing except
in so far as it is represented on our retina; and things which are
represented on our retina exactly alike, will be seen alike. The
distances of all objects from the eye, being lines directed endwise to
the retina, can only project themselves upon it by single points, that
is to say, exactly alike; therefore they Edition: current; Page: [267]
are seen exactly alike. This, which is Berkeley’s argument, Mr. Bailey,
in his pamphlet, disposes of by saying that it supposes the distances to
be “material or physical lines,” since “imaginary or hypothetical lines
can project no points on the retina.”[*] We must again reiterate our
fear of misrepresenting Mr. Bailey, for we can scarcely suppose him to
mean (what he seems to say) that only bodies can be represented on the
retina, and not the blank spaces between bodies; or else, that we indeed
see bodies when, and only when, they are imaged on the retina, but see
the spaces between them without any such optical equivalent. The fact
surely is, that we see bodies and their distances by precisely the same
mechanism. We see two stars, if they are imaged on the retina, and not
otherwise; we see the interval between those stars, if there is an
interval on the retina between the two images, and if there is no such
interval we see it not. Now, as the interval between an object andnourn
eye has not any interval answering to it on the retina, we do not see
it. Surely this argument does not depend upon an implied assumption that
the intervals between objects are physical lines joining them.

This is Mr. Bailey’s answer to one of ouroarguments. Whethero he has
succeeded any better in replying to the remainder of them, we must leave
it to others to judge.

Mr. Bailey, in his reply, insists very much on a point which we passed
over in our former article—the confirmation whichphe imagines his
theoryp to derive fromqMr.q Wheatstone’s discoveries respecting
binocular vision, exhibited in the phenomena of the stereoscope.[†] We
think Mr. Bailey must admit, on further consideration, that these
phenomena (as he himself says of Cheselden’s observations)* are equally
consistent with both Edition: current; Page: [268] theories. The
stereoscope makes us see, or appear to see, solidity; it makes us look
upon a flat picture of an object, and have, more completely than we ever
had before, the semblance of seeing the object in three dimensions. But
how is this done? Merely by imitating on a plane, more exactly than was
ever done before, the precise sensations of colour and visible form
which we habitually have when a solid object, a body in three
dimensions, is presented to us. The stereoscope produces a more complete
illusion than a mere picture, because it does what no previous picture
ever did—it allows for, and imitates, the two different sets of ocular
appearances which we receive from an object very near to us when we look
at it with both our eyes. If either theory could derive support from
this experiment, it would surely be that which supposes our perceptions
of solidity to be inferences rapidly drawn from visual impressions
confined to two dimensions. But we do not insist upon this, as we deem
the argument from pictures, in any of its forms, only valid to prove,
not the truth of Berkeley’s theory, but its sufficiency to explain the
phenomena; or, as we before expressed it [p. 256 above], that a solid
may, not that it must, be seen originally as a plane.

In the course of his remarks, Mr. Bailey takes frequent opportunities of
animadverting on the tone of our article, in a manner evincing at least
as much sensitiveness to what he deems hostile criticism, as is at all
compatible with the character of a philosopher.[*] We were so entirely
unconscious of having laid ourselves open to this kind ofsreproofs, as
to have flattered ourselves that the style and tone of our criticism on
a single opinion of Mr. Bailey, bore indubitable marks of the unfeigned
respect which we entertain for his general powers; nor are we aware of
having shown any other “bluntness,” “confidence,” or “arrogance,”[†]
than are implied in thinking ourselves right, and, by consequence, Mr.
Bailey wrong. We certainly did not feel ourselves required, by
consideration for him, to state our difference of opinion with pretended
hesitation. We should not have written on the subject unless we had been
able to form a decided opinion on it; and, having done so, to have
expressed that opinion otherwise than decidedly would have been
cowardice, not modesty; it would have been sacrificing our conviction of
truth to fear of offence. To Edition: current; Page: [269] dispute the
soundness of a man’s doctrines and the conclusiveness of his arguments,
may always be interpreted as an assumption of superiority over him: true
courtesy, however, between thinkers, is not shown by refraining from
this sort of assumption, but by tolerating it in one another; and we
claim from Mr. Bailey this tolerance, as we, on our part, sincerely and
cheerfully concede to him the like.

Edition: current; Page: [270] Edition: current; Page: [271]


GROTE’S HISTORY OF GREECE [I]
 1846

Edition: current; Page: [272]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Dissertations and Discussions, II (1867), 283-334, where under the
title, “Early Grecian History and Legend,” appears “(A Review of the
first Two Volumes of ‘Grote’s History of Greece.’*)” with the footnote
reading “Edinburgh Review, October 1846.” Reprinted from ER, LXXXIV
(Oct., 1846), 343-77, unsigned, where it is headed “Art. III.—A History
of Greece.—I. Legendary Greece.—II. Grecian History to the Reign of
Peisistratus of Athens. By George Grote, Esq. Two vols. 8vo. London:
[Murray,] 1846”; running heads “Grote’s History of Greece.” Identified
in JSM’s bibliography as “A review of the first two volumes of Grote’s
History of Greece in the Edinburgh Review for October 1846.” (MacMinn,
60.) There are no corrections or alterations in the copy of the
Edinburgh article in the Somerville College Library.

In the footnoted variants, “59” indicates D&D, II (1st ed.); “67”
indicates D&D, II (2nd ed., the copy-text); “46” indicates Edinburgh
Review. For comment on the composition of the essay and related matters,
see the Introduction and the Textual Introduction, xxviii-xxxiii and
lxxxv-lxxxvi above.

Edition: current; Page: [273]


Grote’s History of Greece [I]

the interest of Grecian history is unexhausted and inexhaustible. As a
mere story, hardly any other portion of authentic history can compete
with it. Its characters, its situations, the very march of its
incidents, are epic. It is an heroic poem, of which the personages are
peoples. It is also, of all histories of which we know so much, the most
abounding in consequences to us who now live. The true ancestors of the
European nations (it has been well said) are not those from whose blood
they are sprung, but those from whom they derive the richest portion of
their inheritance. The battle of Marathon, even as an event in English
history, is more important than the battle of Hastings. If the issue of
that day had been different, the Britons and the Saxons might still have
been wandering in the woods.

The Greeks are also the most remarkable people who have yet existed.
Not, indeed, if by this be meant those who have approached nearest (if
such an expression may be used where all are at so immeasurable a
distance) to the perfection of social arrangements, or of human
character. Their institutions, their way of life, even that which is
their greatest distinction, the cast of their sentiments and development
of their faculties, were radically inferior to the best (we wish it
could be said to the collective) products of modern civilization. It is
not the results achieved, but the powers and efforts required to make
the achievement, that measure their greatness as a people. They were the
beginners of nearly everything, Christianity excepted, of which the
modern world makes its boast. If in several things they were but few
removes from barbarism, they alone among nations, so far as is known to
us, emerged from barbarism by their own efforts, not following in the
track of any more advanced people. If with them, as in all antiquity,
slavery existed as an institution, they were not the less the
originators of political freedom, and the grand exemplars and sources of
it to modern Europe. If their discords, jealousies, and wars between
city and city, caused the ruin of their national independence, yet the
arts of war and government evolved in those intestine contests made them
the first who united great empires under civilized rule—the first who
broke down those barriers of petty nationality, which had been so fatal
to themselves—and by making Greek ideas and language common to large
regions of the earth, commenced that general fusion of races and
nations, Edition: current; Page: [274] which, followed up by the Romans,
prepared the way for the cosmopolitism of modern times.

They were the first people who had an historical literature; as perfect
of its kind (though not the highest kind) as their oratory, their
poetry, their sculpture, and their architecture. They were the founders
of mathematics; of physics; of the inductive study of politics, so early
exemplified in Aristotle; of the philosophy of human nature and life. In
each they made the indispensable first steps, which are the foundation
of all the rest—steps such as could only have been made by minds
intrinsically capable of everything which has since been accomplished.
With a religious creed eminently unfavourable to speculation, because
affording a ready supernatural solution of all natural phenomena, they
yet originated freedom of thought. They, the first, questioned nature
and the universe by their rational faculties, and brought forth answers
not suggested by any established system of priestcraft; and their free
and bold spirit of speculation it was, which, surviving in its results,
broke the yoke of another enthralling system of popular religion,
sixteen hundred years after they had ceased to exist as a people. These
things were effected in two centuries of national existence: twenty and
upwards have since elapsed, and it is sad to think how little
comparatively has been accomplished.

To give a faithful and living portraiture of such a people; to show what
they were and did, and as much as possible of the means by which they
did it—by what causes so meteor-like a manifestation of human nature was
produced or aided, and by what faults or necessities it was arrested; to
deduce from the qualities which the Greeks displayed collectively or
individually, and from the modes in which those qualities were
unconsciously generated or intentionally cultivated, the appropriate
lessons for the guidance of our own world—is an enterprise never yet
attempted systematically, nor attempted successfully at all. Such is the
declared object of the work of which the first two volumes lie before
us. “First, to embody in his own mind, and next to lay out before his
readers, the general picture of the Grecian world,” is Mr. Grote’s
description of his task.

The historian, [he says,] will especially study to exhibit the
spontaneous movement of Grecian intellect, sometimes aided but never
borrowed from without, and lighting up a small portion of a world
otherwise clouded and stationary; and to set forth the action of that
social system, which, while ensuring to the mass of freemen a degree of
protection elsewhere unknown, acted as a stimulus to the creative
impulses of genius, and left the superior minds sufficiently unshackled
to soar above religious and political routine, to overshoot their own
age, and to become the teachers of posterity.*

In this undertaking there is work for a succession of thinkers; nor will
it Edition: current; Page: [275] be brought to completeness by any one
historian or philosopher. But the qualifications of Mr. Grote, and the
contents of these two volumes, give assurance that he will be remembered
not only as the first who has seriously undertaken the work, but as one
who will have made great steps towards accomplishing it. In ascribing to
him the first attempt at a philosophical history of Greece, we mean no
disparagement to the very valuable labours of his predecessor and
friend, Bishop Thirlwall.[*] That distinguished scholar has done much
for the facts of Grecian history. Before him, no one had applied to
those facts, considered as a whole, the most ordinary canons of
historical credibility. The only modern historian of Greece who
attempted or even affected criticism on evidence, Mr. Mitford, made
almost no other use of it than to find reasons for rejecting all
statements discreditable to any despot or usurper.[†] Dr. Thirlwall has
effectually destroyed Mitford as an historical authority; by
substituting (though so unostentatiously as to give no sufficient idea
of the service rendered) a candid and impartial narrative, for the most
prejudiced misrepresentation by which party passion has been known to
pervert the history of a distant time and a foreign people. But Dr.
Thirlwall’s, though highly and justly esteemed as a critical, does not
attempt to be a philosophical history; nor was such an attempt to be
expected from its original purpose. And though, in its progress, it has
far outgrown in bulk, and still more in amplitude of scope and permanent
value, its primitive design,a the plan has not been fundamentally
altered; and the most important part of Mr. Grote’s undertaking has not
been, in any respect, forestalled by it.

The portion which Mr. Grote has completed, and which is now published,
appears at some disadvantage, from its not including even the beginning
of the part of Grecian history which is of chief interest either to the
common or to the philosophical reader. Mr. Grote, in his preface,
laments that the religious and poetical attributes of the Greek mind
appear thus far in disproportionate relief, as compared with its powers
of acting, organizing, judging, and speculating.b He might have added,
that the Edition: current; Page: [276] religion and the poetry are only
those of the most primitive period, the time before which nothing is
known. A volume and a half are devoted to the legendary age; and the
remaining half volume does not carry us much beyond the first dawn of
real history.

The Legends of Greece Mr. Grote relates at greater length than has been
thought necessary by any of his predecessors. This is incident to the
design, which no one before him had seriously entertained, of making the
history of Greece a picture of the Greek mind. There is no more
important element in the mind of Greece than the legends. They
constituted the belief of the Greeks of the historical period,
concerning their own past. They formed also the Grecian religion; and
the religion of an early people is the groundwork of its primitive
system of thought on all subjects. Mr. Grote makes no distinction
between the legends of the Gods and those of the Heroes. He relates the
one and the other literally, as they were told by the poets, and
believed by the general public, down to the time of the Roman empire. He
makes no attempt to discriminate historical matter in the stories of
heroes, no more than in those of the gods. Not doubting that some of
them do contain such matter—that many of the tales of the heroic times
are partially grounded on incidents which really happened—he thinks it
useless to attempt to conjecture what these were. The siege of Troy is
to him no more an historical fact than the births and amours of the
gods, as recorded in Hesiod. The only thing which he deems historical in
either is, that the Greeks believed them, and the poets sung them.
Whether they were believed from the first, as they were afterwards, on
the authority of poets, or the poets grounded their narratives on
stories already current, we have no means of ascertaining; in some cases
the one thing may have happened, in some the other; in Mr. Grote’s view
it is immaterial, since neither the poems nor the so-called traditions
bear, in his eyes, the smallest character of historical evidence.

This is essentially the doctrine of Niebuhr; and, in the hands of that
eminent investigator of antiquity, it has, by English scholars,
generally Edition: current; Page: [277] been accepted as subversive of
the previously received view of Roman history. But no one, not even the
translator of Niebuhr, Dr. Thirlwall,[*] had applied this doctrine in
the same unsparing manner to the Greek legends. Unqualified rejection
has been confined to the stories of the gods. Between them and those of
the heroes, a Greek would have been unable to see any difference. To his
mind, both rested on the same identical testimony; both were alike part
of his religious creed; supernatural agency, and supernatural motives
and springs of action, are the pervading soul as much of the heroic as
of the divine legends; the gods themselves appear in them quite as
prominently, and even the heroes are real, though inferior, divinities.
By moderns, however, the supernatural machinery (as it is called by
critics profoundly ignorant of the spirit of antiquity) has been treated
as a sort of scaffolding which could be taken down, instead of the main
framework and support of the structure. The history of the Trojan war
has been written on the authority of the Iliad, suppressing only the
intervention of the gods, and whatever seemed romantic or improbable in
the human motives and characters. As much credit is thus accorded to the
poet, in all but the minute details of his narrative, as is given to the
most veracious witness in a court of justice; since even with him we do
no more than believe his statements where they are neither incredible in
themselves, nor contradicted by more powerful testimony. With this mode
of dealing with legendary narratives, Mr. Grote is altogether at war.
His discussion of the credibility of what are called traditions is
eminently original, evolving into distinctness principles and canons of
evidence and belief, which, by Niebuhr, are rather implicitly assumed
than directly stated.

The following passages will give a clear idea of Mr. Grote’s main
position:

In applying the semi-historical theory to Grecian mythical narrative, it
has been often forgotten that a certain strength of testimony, or
positive ground of belief, must first be tendered before we can be
called upon to discuss the antecedent probability or improbability of
the incidents alleged. The belief of the Greeks themselves, without the
smallest aid from special orccotemporaryc witnesses, has been tacitly
assumed as sufficient to support the case, provided only sufficient
deduction be made from the mythical narratives to remove all antecedent
improbabilities. It has been assumed that the faith of the people must
have rested originally upon some particular historical event, involving
the identical persons, things, and places, which the original mythes
exhibit, or at least the most prominent among them. But when we examine
the psychagogic influences predominant in the society among whom this
belief originally grew up, we shall see that their belief is of Edition:
current; Page: [278] little or no evidentiary value, and that the growth
and diffusion of it may be satisfactorily explained without supposing
any special basis of matters of fact.

The general disposition to adopt the semi-historical theory as to the
genesis of Grecian mythes, arises in part from reluctance in critics to
impute to the mythopœic ages extreme credulity or fraud, and from the
presumption that where much is believed, some portion of it must be
true. There would be some weight in these grounds of reasoning, if the
ages under discussion had been supplied with records, and accustomed to
critical inquiry. But amongst a people unprovided with the former and
strangers to the latter, credulity is necessarily at its maximum, as
well in the narrator himself as in his hearers: the idea of deliberate
fraud is moreover inapplicable, for if the hearers are disposed to
accept what is related to them as a revelation from the muse, the œstrus
of composition is quite sufficient to impart a similar persuasion to the
poet whose mind is penetrated with it. The belief of that day can hardly
be said to stand apart by itself as an act of reason: it becomes
confounded with vivacious imagination and earnest emotion; and in every
case where these mental excitabilities are powerfully acted upon, faith
comes unconsciously and as a matter of course.

It is, besides, a presumption far too largely and indiscriminately
applied, even in our own advanced age, that where much is believed,
something must necessarily be true—that accredited fiction is always
traceable to some basis of historical truth. The influence of
imagination and feeling is not confined simply to the process of
retouching, transforming, or magnifying narratives originally founded on
fact; it will often create new narratives of its own, without any such
preliminary basis. Where there is any general body of sentiment
pervading men living in society, whether it be religious or
political—love, admiration, or antipathy—all incidents tending to
illustrate that sentiment are eagerly believed, rapidly circulated, and
(as a general rule) easily accredited. If real incidents are not at
hand, impressive fictions will be provided to satisfy the demand: the
perfect harmony of such fictions with the prevalent feeling stands in
the place of certifying testimony, and causes men to hear them, not
merely with credence, but even with delight: to call them in question
and require proof, is a task which cannot be undertaken without
incurring obloquy. Of such tendencies in the human mind, abundant
evidence is furnished by the innumerable religious legends which have
acquired currency in various parts of the world—legends which derived
their origin, not from special facts misreported and exaggerated, but
from pious feelings pervading the society, and translated into narrative
by forward and imaginative minds—legends in which not merely the
incidents, but often even the personages are unreal, yet in which the
generating sentiment is conspicuously discernible, providing its own
matter as well as its own form. Other sentiments also, as well as the
religious, provided they be fervent and widely diffused, will find
expression in current narrative, and become portions of the general
public belief: every celebrated and notorious character is the source of
a thousand fictions exemplifying his peculiarities. And if it be true,
as I think present observation may show us, that such creative agencies
are even now visible and effective, when the materials of genuine
history are copious and critically studied—much more are we warranted in
concluding, that in ages destitute of records, strangers to historical
testimony, and full of belief in divine inspiration, both as to the
future and as to the past, narratives purely fictitious will acquire
ready and uninquiring credence, provided only they be plausible, and in
harmony with the preconceptions of the auditors.

(Vol. I, pp. 572-3, 576-9.)

Edition: current; Page: [279]
The two points here insisted upon are, the large space which sheer and
absolute fiction still occupies in human beliefs—a place naturally
larger as we recede further into a remote and uncritical antiquity; and
the tendency of any strong and widely diffused feeling to embody itself
in fictitious narratives, which pass from mouth to mouth, and grow into
traditions.

These points have been illustrated in a more quotable, because a more
condensed form, in a fugitive publication, of which Mr. Grote here
acknowledges the authorship.[*] From this we borrow an illustration, too
apt to be dispensed with,—a modern mythe, caught in the act of
formation. Among the “numerous fictions” which, in the words of Mr.
Moore’s “Life of Byron,” have been “palmed upon the world” as his
“romantic tours and wonderful adventures in places he never saw, and
with persons that never existed,”[†] one is thus recounted, in a review
of the poem of Manfred, by no less a person than Goethe.

He [Byron] has often enough confessed what it is that torments him.
There are, properly speaking, two females whose phantoms for ever haunt
him, and in this piece also perform principal parts—one under the name
of Astarte; the other without form or presence, and merely a voice. Of
the horrid occurrence which took place with the former, the following is
related:—When a bold and enterprising young man, he won the affections
of a Florentine lady. Her husband discovered the amour, and murdered his
wife; but the murderer was the same night found dead in the street, and
there was no one to whom suspicion could be attached. Lord Byron removed
from Florence, and these spirits haunted him all his life after. This
romantic incident is rendered highly probable by innumerable allusions
to it in his poems.[‡]

On this Mr. Grote comments as follows:

The story which Goethe relates of the intrigue and double murder at
Florence is not a misreported fact: it is a pure and absolute fiction.
It is not a story of which one part is true and another part false, nor
in which you can hope, by removing ever so much of superficial
exaggeration, to reach at last a subsoil of reality. All is alike
untrue, the basis as well as the details. In the mind of the original
inventor, the legend derived its birth, not from any erroneous
description which had reached his ears respecting adventures of the real
Lord Byron, but from the profound and vehement impression which Lord
Byron’s poetry had made, both upon him and upon all others around him.
The poet appeared to be breathing out his own soul and Edition: current;
Page: [280] sufferings in the character of his heroes—we ought rather to
say, of his hero, πολλω̑ν ὀνομάτων μορϕὴ μία[*]—he seemed like one struck
down as well as inspired, by some strange visitation of destiny. In what
manner, and from what cause, had the Eumenides been induced thus to
single him out as their victim? A large circle of deeply-moved readers,
and amongst them the greatest of all German authors, cannot rest until
this problem be solved: either a fact must be discovered, or a fiction
invented for the solution. The minds of all being perplexed by the same
mystery, and athirst for the same explanation, nothing is wanted except
a prima vox. Some one, more forward and more felicitous than the rest,
imagines and proclaims the tragical narrative of the Florentine married
couple. So happily does the story fit in, that the inventor seems only
to have given clear utterance to that which others were dimly shadowing
out in their minds: the lacerated feelings of the poet are no longer an
enigma—the die which has stamped upon his verses their peculiar impress,
has been discovered and exhibited to view. If, indeed, we ask what is
the authority for the tale—to speak in the Homeric language, it has been
suggested by some god, or by the airy-tongued Ossa, the bearer of
encouragement and intelligence from omniloquent Zeus—to express the same
idea in homely and infantine English, it has been whispered by a little
bird. But we may be pretty well assured, that few of the audience will
raise questions about authority—the story drops into its place like the
keystone of an arch, and exactly fills the painful vacancy in their
minds—it seems to carry with it the same sort of evidence as the key
which imparts meaning to a manuscript in cipher, and they are too well
pleased with the acquisition to be very nice as to the title. Nay, we
may go further and say, that the man who demonstrates its falsehood will
be the most unwelcome of all instructors; so that we trust, for the
comfort of Goethe’s last years, that he was spared the pain of seeing
his interesting mythus about Lord Byron contemptuously blotted out by
Mr. Moore.[†]

Suppose that there had never been any authentic biography of Byron, and
that his own works and the various testimonies about his personality
having all perished, his name were carried down to a remote age
exclusively by this writing of Goethe. The case would then be parallel
with that of the heroic age of Greece; and the following passage
describes what would probably have happened.

In former days, the Florentine intrigue, and the other stories noticed
by Mr. Moore, would have obtained undisputed currency as authentic
materials for the life of Lord Byron; then would have succeeded
rationalizing historians, who, treating the stories as true at the
bottom, would have proceeded to discriminate the basis of truth from the
accessories of fiction. One man would have disbelieved the supposed
murder of the wife, another that of the husband; a third would have said
that, the intrigue having been discovered, the husband and wife had both
retired into convents, the one under feelings of deep distress, the
other in bitter repentance, and that the fleshly lusts being thus
killed, it was hence erroneously stated that the Edition: current; Page:
[281] husband and wife had themselves been killed. If the reader be not
familiar with the Greek scholiasts, we are compelled to assure him that
the last explanation would have found much favour in their eyes,
inasmuch as it saves the necessity of giving the direct lie to any one,
or of saying that any portion of the narrative is absolutely unfounded.
The misfortune is, that though the story would thus be divested of all
its salient features, and softened down into something very sober and
colourless, perhaps even edifying, yet it would not be one whit nearer
the actual matter of fact. Something very like what we have been
describing, however, would infallibly have taken place, had we not been
protected by a well-informed biographer, and by the copious memoranda of
a positive age.[*]

The feelings to which the early Grecian legends addressed themselves,
and to which they owed not their currency only, but most of them
probably their very existence, were sentiments most strong and
pervading; the religious feelings of the people, and their ancestorial
feelings. The two, indeed, may be reduced to one, for the ancestorial
were also in the most literal sense religious feelings. The legendary
ancestors of each family, tribe, or race, were the immediate descendants
of deities—were immortal beings, with supernatural powers to destroy or
save, and worshipped with the rites and honours paid to gods. The
difference between them and the gods was chiefly this, that they had
once been men, and had performed exploits on earth which were the pride
and glory of other men still living, who honoured them as patrons and
guardian divinities—a distinction in no way tending to abate the thirst
for wonderful tales respecting the heroes.

If a story harmonized with the prevailing sentiment, to doubt its truth
would never occur to any one, not even to the inventors themselves;
since, in a rude age, the suggestions of vivid imagination and strong
feeling are always deemed the promptings of a god. The inspiration of
the muse was not then a figure of speech, but the sincere and artless
belief of the people; the bard and the prophet were analogous
characters; Demodocus, at the court of King Alcinous, could sing the
Trojan war by revelation from Apollo or from a Muse;* and Hesiod, in the
Theogony, could declare respecting himself that he knew, by the favour
of the Muses, the past, the present, and the future.[†] Herodotus
expressly says that Hesiod and Homer “were the authors of the Greek
Theogony, gave titles to the gods, distinguished their attributes and
functions, and described their forms;” that until taught by them, the
Greeks were ignorant “whence each of the gods sprang, and whether all of
them were always existing, and what were Edition: current; Page: [282]
their shapes.”* Plato invariably assumes the same thing. The poems were
a kind of sacred books, like the Ramayun and the Mahabharat.

It may perhaps be said, that the eager interest here supposed in the
exploits of ancestors, implies the ancestors to be at least real
persons, surviving in the memory of those to whom the tales were told;
and that therefore most of the heroes of legend must have really
existed, however much of the marvellous in their adventures may be due
to the imagination of their descendants. This doctrine would not be
without plausibility, were it not the known practice of the early Greeks
to create not only imaginary adventures of ancestors, but imaginary
ancestors. It was the universal theory of Greece that every name, common
to an aggregation of persons, indicated a common progenitor. Whether it
was the name of a race, as Dorians, Ionians, Achæans; of a people, as
Thessalians, Dolopians, Arcadians, Ætolians; of any of the numerous
political divisions of a people, or of those other divisions not made by
laws, but held together by religious rites and a traditional tie, the
γένη or gentes (representing probably the units by the aggregation of
which the community had, at some early period, been formed); all
these,das well as manyd names of towns and localities, were believed to
be etymologically derived from a primeval founder and patriarch of the
whole tribe. Even names of which the origin was obvious, did not escape
the application of the theory. The names of the four tribes in the
primitive Athenian constitution, Geleontes, Hopletes, Argades, and
Aigikoreis, appellations so evidently derived from their occupations,
were ascribed, according to custom, to four Eponymi, sons of Ion, the
general ancestor of the race, whose names were Geleon, Hoples, Argades,
and Aigikores. No one now makes any scruple of rejecting the whole class
of Eponymi, or name-heroes, from the catalogue of historical personages.
Among the Greeks, however, they were the most precious of any; they were
as firmly believed in, and their existence and adventures as justly
entitled to the name of tradition, as any Grecian legend whatever.

But grant that the personages of the heroic legends were real, as
doubtless some warriors and rulers must have left behind them an
enduring Edition: current; Page: [283] memory, to which legends would
not fail to attach themselves;—could we distinguish among the names,
those which belonged to actual persons, would it follow that the actions
ascribed to them bore a resemblance to any real occurrences? We may
judge from a parallel instance. In the earlier Middle Ages, the European
mind had returned to something like the naïf unsuspecting faith of
primitive times. It accordingly gave birth to a profusion of legends:
those of saints, in the first place, almost a literature in themselves,
of which, though very pertinent to our purpose, we say nothing here. But
the same age produced the counterpart of the tales of Hercules and
Theseus, of the wanderings of Ulysses and the Argonautic expedition, in
the shape of romances of chivalry. Like the Homeric poems, the romances
announced themselves as true narratives, and were, down to the
fourteenth century, popularly believed as such. The majority relate to
personages probably altogether fictitious; Amadis and Lancelot we are
nowise called upon to believe in; and of King Arthur, as of King
Agamemnon, we have no means of ascertaining if he ever really existed or
not. But the uncertainty does not extend to all these romantic heroes.
That age, unlike the Homeric, notwithstanding its barbarism, preserved
written records; and we know consequently from other evidence than the
romances themselves, that some of the names they contain are real.
Charlemagne is not only an historical character, but one whose life is
tolerably well known to us; and so genuine a hero, both in war and
peace—his real actions so surprising and admirable—that fiction itself
might have been content with ornamenting his true biography, instead of
fitting him with another entirely fabulous. The age, however, required,
to satisfy its ideal, a Charlemagne of a different complexion from the
real monarch. The chronicle of Archbishop Turpin,[*] a compilation of
poetic legends, supplied this want. Though containing hardly anything
historical, except the name of Charlemagne and the fact of an expedition
into Spain, it was declared genuine history by Pope Calixtus the Second;
was received as such by Vincent de Beauvais, who, for his great
erudition, was made preceptor to the sons of the wise King, Saint Louis
of France; and from this, not from Eginhard or the monk of St. Gall, the
poets who followed drew the materials of their narrative. Even, then, if
Priam and Hector were real persons, the siege of Edition: current; Page:
[284] Troy by the Greeks may be as fabulous as that of Paris by the
Saracens, or Charlemagne’s conquest of Jerusalem. In the poem of
Ariosto,[*] the principal hero and heroine are Ruggiero and Bradamante,
the ancestors, real or imaginary, of the Dukes of Ferrara, at whose
court he lived and wrote. Does any one, for this reason, believe a
syllable of the adventures which he ascribes either to these or to his
other characters? Another personage of legend, who is also a personage
of history, is Virgil. If the author of the Æneid were only known to us
by the traditions of the Middle Ages, in what character would he have
been transmitted to us? In that of a mighty enchanter. Such is the worth
of what is called tradition, even when the persons are real, and the age
not destitute of records. What must it be in times anterior to the use
of writing?

It is now almost forgotten, that England, too, had a mythic history,
once received as genuine; and neither has this wanted the consecration
of the highest poetical genius, in the instances at least of Lear and
Cymbeline.

If we take the history of our own country, as it was conceived and
written, from the twelfth to the seventeenth century, by Hardyng,
Fabyan, Grafton, Hollinshed, and others, we shall find that it was
supposed to begin with Brute the Trojan, and was carried down from
thence, for many ages, and through a long succession of kings, to the
times of Julius Cæsar. A similar belief of descent from Troy, arising
seemingly from a reverential imitation of the Romans, and of their
Trojan origin, was cherished in the fancy of other European nations.
With regard to the English, the chief circulator of it was Geoffrey of
Monmouth, and it passed with little resistance or dispute into the
national faith. The kings, from Brute downwards, were enrolled in
regular chronological series, with their respective dates annexed. In a
dispute which took place during the reign of Edward I (ad 1301), between
England and Scotland, the descent of the Kings of England from Brute the
Trojan was solemnly embodied in a document put forth to sustain the
rights of the crown of England, as an argument bearing on the case then
in discussion; and it passed without attack from the opposing party;* an
incident which reminds us of the appeal made by Æschines, in the
contention between the Athenians and Philip of Macedon respecting
Amphipolis, to the primitive dotal rights of Akamas, son of Theseus;[†]
and also of the defence urged by the Athenians, to sustain their
conquest of Sigeium against the reclamations of the Mitylenæans, wherein
the former alleged that they had as much right to the place as any of
the other Greeks who had formed part of the victorious armament of
Agamemnon.

Edition: current; Page: [285]
The tenacity with which this early series of British kings was defended,
is no less remarkable than the facility with which it was admitted. The
chroniclers, at the beginning of the seventeenth century, warmly
protested against the intrusive scepticism which would cashier so many
venerable sovereigns, and deface so many noble deeds. They appealed to
the patriotic feelings of their hearers, represented the enormity of
their setting up a presumptuous criticism against the belief of ages,
and insisted on the danger of the precedent, as regarded history
generally. Yet, in spite of so large a body of authority and precedent,
the historians of the nineteenth century begin the history of England
with Julius Cæsar. They do not attempt either to settle the date of King
Bladud’s accession, or to determine what may be the basis of truth in
the affecting narrative of Lear.*

(Vol. I, pp. 639-40, 642.)

We will add, before taking our leave of this part of the subject, one
argument more, which we conceive to be in itself almost decisive.
Authentic history, as we ascend the stream of time, grows thinner and
scantier, the incidents fewer, and the narratives less
circumstantial;—shading off through every degree of twilight into the
darkness of night. And such a gradual daybreak we find in Greek history,
at and shortly before the first Olympiad (bc 776), the point from which
the historical Greeks commenced their computation of time. We cannot be
far wrong in fixing this as the epoch at which written characters began
to be regularly employed by public authority, for the recordation of
periodical religious solemnities—always the first events systematically
recorded, on account of the fearful religious consequences attaching to
any mistake in the proper periodeofe their celebration.

But if, beyond the darkness which bounds this early morning of history,
we come suddenly into the full glare of day—an island of light in the
dark ocean of the unrecorded past, peopled with majestic forms, and
glittering with splendid scenery—we may be well assured that the vision
is as unreal as Plato’sfAtlantisf,[*] and that the traditions and the
poems which vouch for its past existence, are the offspring of fancy,
not of memory. True history is not thus interrupted in its course; it
does not, like the Arcadian rivers, sink into the ground, and, after a
long disappearance, rise again at a Edition: current; Page: [286] remote
point. Light first, and darkness afterwards, may be the order of
invention, but it is seldom that of remembrance.

The elaborate chapter in which Mr. Grote traces the progress of opinion
among instructed Greeks, respecting their own legends, is important, not
only in reference to the question of credibility, but as a part of the
history of the human mind. Originating in a rude age, by which they were
naïvely and literally believed, the legends descended into a period of
comparative knowledge and culture. With the tone of that later age, or
at least of the instructed portion of it, they were no longer in
harmony. Several things conspired to produce this divergence. As
communications grew more frequent, and travelled men became acquainted
with legends for which they had acquired no early reverence, the
mutually contradictory character of the stories themselves tended to
undermine their authority. The characters and actions ascribed to the
gods and heroes, contained much that was repugnant to the altered moral
feelings of a more civilized epoch: already Xenophanes, one of the
earliest Grecian philosophical inquirers, composed poems to denounce, in
the most vehement terms, the stories related of the gods by Hesiod and
Homer, “the universal instructor,” as he terms him.[*] But, more than
all, the commencement of physical science and intelligent observation of
nature, introduced a conception of the universe, and a mode of
interpreting its phenomena, in continual conflict with the simplicity of
ancient faith: accustoming men to refer to physical causes and natural
laws, what were conceived by their ancestors as voluntary interventions
of supernatural beings, in wrath or favour to mortals.

This altered tone in the more cultivated part of the Grecian mind, did
not, however, proceed to actual disbelief in the legendary religion of
the people. Mankind do not pass abruptly from one connected system of
thought to another: they first exhaust every contrivance for reconciling
the two. To break entirely with the religion of their forefathers, would
have been a disruption of old feelings, too painful and difficult for
the average strength even of superior minds; and could not have been
done openly, without incurring a certainty of the fate which, with all
the precautions they adopted, overtook Anaxagoras and Socrates. But even
of the philosophers, there were at first very few who carried the spirit
of freethinking so far. In general, they were unable to emancipate
themselves from the old religious traditions, but were just as little
capable of believing them literally. “The result was a new impulse,
partaking of both the discordant forces—one of those thousand
unconscious compromises between Edition: current; Page: [287] the
rational convictions of the mature man, and the indelible illusions of
early faith, religious as well as patriotic, which human affairs are so
often destined to exhibit.”[*] The legends, in their obvious sense, were
no longer credible; but it was necessary to find for them a meaning in
which they could be believed. And hence a series of efforts, continued
with increasing energy from the first known prose historian, Hecatæus,
to the Neoplatonic adversaries of Christianity in the school of
Alexandria, to which the nearest parallel is the attempts of Paulus and
the German rationalists to explain away the Hebrew Scriptures. Rejected
in their obvious interpretation, the narratives were admitted in some
other sense, which stripped them of the direct intervention of any
deity. They were represented either as ordinary histories, coloured by
poetic ornament, or allegories, in which moral instruction, physical
knowledge, or esoteric religious doctrines, were designedly wrapt up.
The succession of these rationalizing explanations is recounted at
length, with great learning and philosophy, by Mr. Grote.

His opinion of the historical system of explanation has been seen in the
preceding extracts. Without being more favourable, on the whole, to the
allegorical theory, he yet makes a concession to it, with which, if we
rightly understand his meaning, we are compelled to disagree. He says,
“Though allegorical interpretation occasionally lands us in great
absurdities, there are certain cases in which it presents intrinsic
evidence of being genuine and correct—i.e. included in the original
purport of the story;”* and he instances the tale of Ate and the Litæ,
in the ninth book of the Iliad, which, he says, no one can doubt,
carries with it an intentional moral. Now, it seems to us that this
remark allows either too much to allegory, or not enough.

Every reader of the Iliad, even in translation, must be familiar with
this fine passage; in which Ateg(by Mr. Grote translated “reckless
impulse”)g[†] is represented as a gigantic figure, who stalks forth
furiously, diffusing ruin; and Litæ, or Prayers, daughters of Zeus or
Jupiter, as slowly limping after her to heal the wounds she has made.
Now, if the poet did not believe the personal existence of Ate and the
Litæ;—if he employed what he knew to be a mere figure of speech, as a
means of giving greater impressiveness to a general remark respecting
the course of human affairs,—the passage is then rightly termed
allegorical. But if, as we conceive, such employment of the language of
polytheism in a merely figurative sense, neither existed nor could exist
until polytheism was virtually defunct; if the use of religious Edition:
current; Page: [288] forms as a simple artifice of rhetoric, would have
appeared to Homer (supposing the idea to have presented itself at all)
an impious profanation; if the poet, in the full simplicity of his
religious faith, accepted literally the personality and divinity of Ate
and the Litæ, there is then no place for the word “allegory,” in its
correct acceptation. That a moral meaning accompanied in his mind the
religious doctrine, and even suggested it, we at once admit: but he
personified and deified the moral agencies concerned; and the story, as
Müller says of the legend of Prometheus and Epimetheus (Forethought and
Afterthought), is not an allegory, but a mythe.[*] Otherwise, we must go
much further, and affirm a substratum of allegory in the whole Greek
religion; for the majority of its deities, including nearly all the more
conspicuous of them, are undoubtedly personifications of either the
physical or the moral powers of nature; and, this granted, the
attributes ascribed to them would necessarily shadow forth those which
observation pointed out in the phenomena over which they were supposed
to preside.

The natural history of Polytheism is now well understood. Religion,
though ex vi termini preternatural, is yet a theory for the explanation
of nature; and generally runs parallel with the progress of human
conceptions of that which it is intended to explain; each step made in
the study of the phenomena determining a modification in the theory. The
savage, drawing his idea of power from his own voluntary impulses,
ascribes will and personality to every individual object in which he
beholds a power beyond his control; and at once commences propitiating
it by prayer and sacrifice. This original Fetishism, towards natural
objects which combine great power with a well-marked individuality, was
prolonged far into the period of Polytheism proper. The Gaia of Hesiod,
mother of all the gods, was not a goddess of the earth, but the earth
itself; and her physical are blended with her divine attributes in a
singular medley. The sun and moon, not deities residing therein, were
the objects of the ancient Grecian worship: their identification with
Apollo and Artemishbelongsh to a much later age. The Hindoos worship as
a goddess the river Nerbudda—not a deity of the river, but the river
itself;* and, if they ascribe to it sex, and other attributes
inconsistent with the physical characteristics of the natural object, it
is from inability to conceive the idea of personality, except in
conjunction with the ordinary human impulses and attributes. The Homeric
Scamander is scarcely other than the animated river itself; and the god
Alpheus, who Edition: current; Page: [289] pursues Arethusa through the
ocean, is the actual river, flowing through the salt waves without
mixing with them, and at length combining its waters in indissoluble
union with those of the fountain it loves.

But where natural objects are not thus strikingly individualized—where
the mind can at once recognise, in a multitude of things, one and the
same power of affecting human interests—its tendency is not to deify the
objects, but to place a deity over them, who,ihimselfi invisible, rules
from a distance a whole class of phenomena. Bread and wine are great and
beneficent powers, but the blindest fetish-worshipper never probably
offered prayer or sacrifice to an individual loaf or wine-flask, but to
an invisible Bacchus or Ceres, whose body, being unseen, is naturally
assimilated to the human, and who is thenceforth handed over to the
poets to exalt and dignify. Thus the first and most obvious step in the
generalization of nature, by arranging objects in classes, is
accompanied by a corresponding generalization of the gods. Fire, being a
more mysterious as well as a more terrible agent, has, in some
religions, been an object of direct worship; but in Homer we find the
transition completely effected from the worship of fire to that of the
fire-god,jHephæstosj. Thunder, the most awful of all, was universally
received as the attribute of the most powerful of deities, the ruler of
gods and men. As thought advanced, not only all physical agencies
capable of ready generalization, as Night, Morning, Sleep, Death,
together with the more obvious of the great emotional agencies, Beauty,
Love, War, but by degrees also the ideal products of a higher
abstraction, as Wisdom, Justice, and the like, were severally accounted
the work and manifestation of as many special divinities.

It became, [as Müller expresses it,] a general habit to concentrate
every form of spiritual existence, whose unity was recognised, into an
apex, which necessarily appeared to the mind as a personal entity. Can
it be imagined that Δίκη, θέμις, Μη̑τις, Μου̑σα, Χάρις, Ἥβη, Ἐριννύς,
Ἔρις, could have attained a generally believed reality, and even in some
measure divine worship, otherwise than through a necessity, grounded on
the epoch of mental development, to contemplate in this manner as a
unity, not only every aspect of nature, but also of human life? How were
it possible to pray to Charis, if she were only viewed as a predicate of
human or higher natures? It is even wrong to consider the worship paid
by the Romans to Virtus, Felicitas, &c. as allegorical in the strict
sense; for then it could be no worship at all.*

Assuredly, these objects of worship were not conceived as ideas, but as
persons, whose fundamental attributes, however, necessarily ran in close
Edition: current; Page: [290] analogy to those of the ideas which they
embodied. Such is the primitive type of polytheism—a thing of no human
invention, but, in the strictest sense of the word, natural and of
spontaneous growth. Afterwards, indeed, poets and priests did invent
stories concerning the gods, more or less connected or consistent with
their original attributes, which stories became incorporated with
religion; and the most popular deities were those concerning whom the
most impressive stories had been feigned. But the legends did not make
the religion; the basis of that was a bonâ fide personification and
divinization of the occult causes of phenomena. In these views we have
no reason to think that we at all differ from Mr. Grote; but if there is
any point in which his expositions do not quite satisfy us, it is, that
they do not bring out strongly enough this part of the case; that the
Greek religion appears in them too much as a sort of accident, the
arbitrary creation of poets and storytellers; its origin in the natural
human faculties and the spontaneous tendencies of the uncultivated
intellect, being indicated indeed, but not placed in a sufficiently
strong light.

With this exception, we can hardly bestow too much praise on this
portion of Mr. Grote’s performance. He has overcome the difficulty, so
great to a modern imagination, of entering intelligently into the
polytheistic frame of mind and conception of nature. In no treatise
which we could mention, certainly in no work connected with Grecian
history, do we find so thorough a comprehension of that state of the
human intellect in which the directly religious interpretation of nature
is paramount—in which every explanation of phenomena, that refers them
to the personal agency of a hidden supernatural power, appears natural
and probable, and every other mode of accounting for them
incredible—where miracles are alone plausible, and explanation by
natural causes is not only offensive to the reverential feelings of the
hearer, but actually repugnant to his reason, so contrary is it to the
habitual mode of interpreting phenomena. A state of mind made perfectly
intelligible by our knowledge of the Hindoos; and nowhere better
exhibited than in the pictures given by near observers of that curious
people, who reproduce in so many respects the mental characteristics of
the infancy of the human race.*

Though many topics discussed in Mr. Grote’s volumes are more important,
there is none more interesting, than the authorship of the Homeric
poems; regarded by all antiquity as the production of one great poet (or
at most two, for the Iliad and Odyssey), but which the scepticism of a
recent period has pronounced to be compilations made as late as the time
of Edition: current; Page: [291] Pisistratus, from a multitudinous
assemblage of popular ballads. Now, however, that the Wolfian hypothesis
seems nearly abandoned in the country in which it arose, the notion that
such productions could have been manufactured by piecing and dovetailing
a number of short poems originally distinct, may be ranked along with
many other conceits of learned ingenuity, in the class of psychological
curiosities. We are aware of no argument on the Wolfian side of the
controversy which really deserves any weight, except the difficulty of
conceiving that such long poems could have been composed and handed down
to posterity by memory alone; for that they were produced prior to the
use of writing, is certain, from many considerations,* and especially
from the absence of the smallest allusion to such an art in the whole
eight-and-forty books; though so full of notices and descriptions of
almost every useful or ornamental process which can be supposed to have
been in existence in that early age, that they have been said to be a
summary of all the knowledge of the time. The preservation of such works
without help from writing, is no doubt, at the first aspect of the
matter, surprising; but only because in this, as in so many other
things, we antedate our modern experience, and apply to early ages the
limited standard of our own. It is well said by Plato in the Phædrus,
that the invention of letters was the great enfeebler of memory.[*] In
our time, when the habit is formed of recording all things in permanent
characters, and when every one relies, not on memory, but on the
substitutes for it, we can scarcely form an idea of what its intrinsic
powers must have been, when exercised and cultivated as a thing to be
solely depended upon. Between the remembering faculties of the Homerids
of Chios, and those of our degenerate days, there was doubtless as great
a difference, as between the powers of eye and ear of a North American
Indian and those of a London citizen. Nor was it, after all, more
difficult to retain a single poem of twenty-four books, than twenty-four
poems of one book each, which is much less than must have formed the
stock in trade of any celebrated ἀοιδὸς. As for the poet himself, he
doubtless, as he proceeded in the composition, wrote his poem, as it
were, on the memory of the younger bards, by whom it is consonant to the
manners of that age that he should have been surrounded.

Those who assert the essential unity of the Homeric poems, by no means
deny that there may have been, and probably were, interpolations, and
even additions of some length, made either by the same or by other
poets, Edition: current; Page: [292] to the original plan. This is the
ground taken by Mr. Grote. He rejects the Pisistratean hypothesis. He
maintains, from internal evidence, the complete unity of plan and
authorship in the Odyssey. He claims a like unity for the greater part
of the Iliad; but argues for an amount of subsequent addition to the
poem, greater than we can bring ourselves to consider probable. We shall
give, in his own words, what is peculiar to his theory.

The first book, together with the eighth, and the books from the
eleventh to the twenty-second inclusive, seem to form the primary
organization of the poem, then properly an Achilleis: the twenty-third
and twenty-fourth books are additions at the tail of this primitive
poem, which still leave it nothing more than an enlarged Achilleis: but
the books from the second to the seventh inclusive, together with the
tenth, are of a wider and more comprehensive character, and convert the
poem from an Achilleis into an Iliad. The primitive frontispiece,
inscribed with the anger of Achilles and its direct consequences, yet
remains, after it has ceased to be co-extensive with the poem. The parts
added, however, are not necessarily inferior in merit to the original
poem; so far is this from being the case, that amongst them are
comprehended some of the noblest efforts of the Grecian epic. Nor are
they more recent in date than the original; strictly speaking, they must
be a little more recent, but they belong to the same generation and
state of society as the primitive Achilleis.

Nothing can be more striking than the manner in which Homer concentrates
our attention, in the first book, upon Achilles as the hero, his quarrel
with Agamemnon, and the calamities of the Greeks, which are held out as
about to ensue from it, through the intercession of Thetis with Zeus.
But the incidents dwelt upon from the beginning of the second book down
to the combat between Hector and Ajax in the seventh, animated and
interesting as they are, do nothing to realize this promise; they are a
splendid picture of the Trojan War generally, and eminently suitable to
that larger title under which the poem has been immortalized; but the
consequences of the anger of Achilles do not appear until the eighth
book. The tenth book, or Doloneia, is also a portion of the Iliad, but
not of the Achilleis; while the ninth book appears to be a subsequent
addition (I venture to say, an unworthy addition), nowise harmonizing
with that main stream of the Achilleis, which flows from the eleventh
book to the twenty-second. The eighth book ought to be read in immediate
connexion with the eleventh, in order to see the structure of what seems
the primitive Achilleis; for there are several passages in the eleventh
and the following books, which prove that the poet who composed them
could not have had present to his mind the main event of the ninth
book—the outpouring of profound humiliation by the Greeks, and from
Agamemnon especially, before Achilles, coupled with formal offers to
restore Briseïs, and pay the amplest compensation for past wrong. The
words of Achilles (not less than those of Patroclus and Nestor) in the
eleventh and following books, plainly imply that the humiliation of the
Greeks before him, for which he thirsts, is as yet future and
contingent; that no plenary apology has yet been tendered, nor any offer
made of restoring Briseïs, while both Nestor and Patroclus, with all
their wish to induce him to take arms, nevertheless view him as one
whose ground of quarrel stands still the same as it did at the
beginning. Moreover, if we look at the first book—the opening of the
Achilleis—we shall see that this prostration of Agamemnon and the chief
Grecian heroes before Achilles, would really be the termination of the
whole poem; for Achilles asks nothing more Edition: current; Page: [293]
from Thetis, nor Thetis anything more from Zeus, than that Agamemnon and
the Greeks may be brought to know the wrong that they have done to their
capital warrior, and humbled to the dust in expiation of it. We may add,
that the abject terror in which Agamemnon appears in the ninth book,
when he sends the supplicatory message to Achilles, as it is not
adequately accounted for by the degree of calamity which the Greeks have
experienced in the preceding (eighth) book, so it is inconsistent with
the gallantry and high spirit with which he strives at the beginning of
the eleventh. The situation of the Greeks only becomes desperate when
the three great chiefs, Agamemnon, Odysseus, and Diomedes, are disabled
by wounds; this is the irreparable calamity which works upon Patroclus,
and through him upon Achilles. The ninth book, as it now stands, seems
to me an addition by a different hand to the original Achilleis, framed
so as both to forestal and spoil the nineteenth book, which is the real
reconciliation of the two inimical heroes. I will venture to add, that
it carries the ferocious pride and egotism of Achilles beyond all
admissible limits, and is shocking to that sentiment of Nemesis which
was so deeply seated in the Grecian mind. We forgive any excess and fury
against the Trojans and Hector after the death of Patroclus, but that he
should remain unmoved by restitution, by abject supplications, and by
the richest atoning presents tendered from the Greeks, indicates an
implacability more than human, and certainly such as neither the poet of
the first book, nor the poet of the last twelve books, seeks to portray.

(Vol. II, pp. 235-6, 238-45.)

We are able to go so far with the distinction drawn by Mr. Grote, as to
admit that he has discriminated well between those parts of the Iliad
whichkcannotk have been additions to the original plan, and those which
possibly may. If the poem does consist of an original basis and a
subsequent enlargement, the books which he has pointed out, or some of
them, must be the parts superadded. But that they, or even the ninth, to
which he takes such vehement exception, really were such subsequent
additionsl(powerful as are some of the considerations he has urged)l, he
has not succeeded in convincing us.

It is true, the books from the second to the seventh inclusive, in no
way forward the action of the poem, as dependent on the anger of
Achilles: and it is remarkable that, during that interval, Zeus not only
suspends the performance of his promise to Thetis in the first book, but
seems absolutely to have forgotten it, and directs his conduct and
counsels by totally different considerations. This last is a serious
blemish in the construction of the story; but imperfection of
workmanship does not prove plurality of workmen; and if the poet
intended to make his poem an Ilias as well as an Achilleis, there would
have been in any case a difficulty of this sort to surmount, which it is
not necessary to suppose that he must have surmounted successfully. But,
if not strictly belonging to the plan of the Achilleis, these books
conduce in a remarkable degree to the effect of those parts of the poem
which do belong to it. In no epic is the interest centred Edition:
current; Page: [294] exclusively in one individual; even in the
Achilleis, not Achilles only, but the Greeks generally, and even the
Trojans, inspire a keen sympathy; and how much that sympathy is promoted
by the preliminary books, needs hardly be pointed out. Not only does the
success of the Greeks in the fourth and fifth books greatly deepen the
sense of their subsequent disaster, by giving it the character of a turn
of fortune; while the exploits of the principal heroes, especially
Diomedes and Ulysses, augment the impression of their difficulties when
those heroes are disabled; but, above all, it is in those books that we
become acquainted with, and interested in, most of the leading
characters of the subsequent epos. Hector especially, on whom the poet
evidently intended that a strong personal interest should rest—what
ground should we have had for sympathising with him, were it not for the
beautiful scenes with Paris and Helen in the fourth book, Andromache and
Hecuba in the sixth, and Ajax in the seventh? Without the books which
Mr. Grote strikes from the original plan, there would be, if we except
the amiable characters of Patroclus and Sarpedon, scarcely anything in
the poem which excites a really personal interest.

With regard to the ninth book, we allow there are difficulties. The
principal is the speech of Achilles to Patroclus in the eleventh book,*
which certainly seems to imply that no atonement had yet been offered,
or supplication made. Mr. Grote quotes several other passages, which
apparently carry a similar implication; but none which, we think, it
would be difficult to get over, if this were disposed of. On the other
hand, there are difficulties in his own theory. He gets rid of three
subsequent allusions to the transactions of the ninth book, by
pronouncing them to be interpolations; but he has overlooked one of
greater importance in the sixteenth, where Achilles says to Patroclus,
that the time has come at which he had said that his revenge would
cease, since the enemy has now reached the ships.† He had said this
nowhere, as the text now stands, except in his answer to the embassy. If
it be suggested that this passage may also be an interpolation,m we
shall still urge that it is not consonant to the character of Achilles,
to suppose that he would have so far renounced his anger as to Edition:
current; Page: [295] send aid to the Greeks even in that extremity, if
he had received no offer whatever of atonement or restitution;—if
Agamemnon and the Greeks had not yet acknowledged their fault, and
humbled themselves before him. With respect to the argument from the
more than human ferocity manifested by Achilles, and its conflict with
the Greek sentiment of Nemesis, we cannot see the matter in the same
light. It is with great hesitation that we should question any opinion
of Mr. Grote on a point of Greek erudition; but we know not what
evidence he has that the peculiar Greek idea of Nemesis—manifested in
the famous speech of Solon to Crœsus,[*] and which afterwards acted so
leading a part in the Athenian drama—had already begun to exist in the
Homeric age. We rather believe it to have been one of the points of
difference between the more solemn and gloomy theology of the historic
age of Greece, and the lively anthropomorphism of the Homeric Pantheon.
We find no traces of it in Homer or Hesiod. We find, indeed, severe
vengeance taken on mortals by the Homeric deities, not for pride or
arrogance generally, but for some special affront to their own dignity;
and particularly for any presumptuous attempt to dispute their
pre-eminence. It is on such provocation that Thamyris is struck blind by
the Muses, and the children of Niobe destroyed by the arrows of Apollo
and Artemis.[†] But no such offence is offered by Achilles in the ninth
book; nor any disobedience to the divine powers. No godnorn goddess had
commanded him to lay aside his wrath, as Pallas, in the first book,
restrains him from drawing his sword, and Zeus, in the twenty-fourth,
enjoins him, through Thetis, to restore the body of Hector. To these
intimations he is at once obedient, and is represented throughout as an
eminently pious hero. Nor are we at all inclined to admit that his
implacability exceeds what the sentiment of that age would allow of, in
a character of vehement passion. He is not intended for a faultless
hero; nor does he show any ferocity in the ninth book, at all comparable
to that which he displays in the sixteenth; where, in the very act of
sending forth Patroclus to aid the Greeks, he utters a fervent wish that
not one Greek or Trojan might be left alive, but they two might alone
survive to conquer Troy. Nor can we forget that several of the nobler
characteristics of Achilles are nowhere so effectually manifested as in
the ninth book; the princely courtesy, rivalling the best conceptions of
chivalrous romance, in his reception of the embassy; and that abhorrence
of disguise, also more resembling the knightly than theoHellenico model,
Edition: current; Page: [296] but so necessary to the ideal of his
character, which hep emphatically announces in the lines so often
quoted:

-   

    Ἐχθρὸς γάρ μοι κει̑νος, ὁμω̑ς ἀΐδαο πύλησιν,
-   

    Ὅς χ’ ἕτερον μὲν κεύθει ἐνὶ ϕρεσίν, ἅλλο δε βάζει.[*]

With regard to the tenth book, we think there is weight in what the
critics have urged, that the successful nocturnal enterprise of Diomed
and Ulysses is skilfully interposed, not only to break the rapid
succession of one battle upon another, but to reanimate the spirits and
courage of the Greeks after the disasters of the eighth book. We cannot
coincide in Mr. Grote’s unwillingness to believe “that the author of the
fifth book (or Aristeia of Diomedes) would condescend to employ the hero
whom he there so brightly glorifies—the victor even over Ares himself—in
slaughtering newly-arrived Thracian sleepers, without any large purpose
or necessity;”[†] since to kill men who were defenceless, provided they
were enemies, and not ἱκέται or suppliants, had little that was
repugnant to Greek feeling, even in a more advanced age; while an ambush
is invariably spoken of in the Iliad as the most dangerous service, and
the most decisive test of courage to which a warrior could be exposed.
An Homeric audience would see, in this unchivalrous massacre, only the
real intrepidity of the two heroes, in venturing alone, and for so
perilous a purpose, into the camp of their sleeping enemies; and, in the
Homeric point of view, it was doubtless an exploit worthy of the most
distinguished warriors.

That Mr. Grote should think it possible for the two concluding books to
be additions, we confess surprises us. We cannot imagine how, with the
ideas of the Greeks, both in the Homeric age and subsequently,
respecting the rites of sepulture, the action of a Greek epos could ever
have been complete until the two heroes, whose successive deaths formed
the catastrophe of the poem, had received the accustomed funeral
honours. Nor would a Greek audience, we think, have tolerated that
Hector, the beloved of Zeus, whose death he so unwillingly concedes to
Destiny and the public opinion of Olympus, should have been abandoned by
him when dead to the ignominious fate designed, and in part executed, by
Achilles. We need not point out how much the character of Achilles
himself would lose of its interest, without the exquisite manner in
which its softer elements are called forth by the interview withqPriam.
Andq though it may be true that “the Homeric man would enter fully into
the thirst of revenge felt by Edition: current; Page: [297]
Achilles,”[*] excessive and brutal as that revenge was, it is assuming
too much to suppose that the Homeric man would have sympathized with
Achilles exclusively. Such, certainly, was not Homer’s purpose, as there
are evidences enough even in the Achilleis to prove.

The chapter on the “State of Society and Manners as exhibited in Grecian
legend,”[†] is sound and judicious; but on this subject previous writers
had not left so much to be performed. A point of originality in Mr.
Grote’s treatment of it is the comparison kept up between the
characteristics of the heroic and those of the historical period. Thus,
for example, the sense of obligation in the Homeric period is
exclusively of a personal kind: “Personal feelings, either towards the
gods, the king, or some near and known individual, fill the whole of a
man’s bosom; out of them arise all the motives to beneficence, and all
the internal restraints upon violence, antipathy, and rapacity; and
special communion, as well as special solemnities, are essential to
their existence;” while, in the conceptions of the citizen of historical
Athens, “the great impersonal authority called The Laws, stood out
separately both as guide and sanction, distinct from religious duty or
private sympathies.”[‡] In the Council of Chiefs, and the Agora or
Popular Assembly, which, though with no definite function or authority,
habitually accompany the Homeric kings, Mr. Grote sees the pre-existing
elements of the subsequent republican governments. The following is an
important remark:

There is yet another point of view in which it behoves us to take notice
of the Council and the Agora as integral portions of the legendary
government of the Grecian communities. We are thus enabled to trace the
employment of public speaking as the standing engine of government and
the proximate cause of obedience, to the social infancy of the nation.
The power of speech in the direction of public affairs becomes more and
more obvious, developed, and irresistible, as we advance towards the
culminating period of Grecian history—the century preceding the battle
of Chæroneia. That its development was greatest among the most
enlightened sections of the Grecian name, and smallest among the more
obtuse and stationary, is matter of notorious fact; and it is not less
true, that the prevalence of this habit was one of the chief causes of
the intellectual eminence of the nation generally. At a time when all
the countries around were plunged comparatively in mental torpor, there
was no motive sufficiently present and powerful to multiply so
wonderfully the productive minds of Greece, except such as arose from
the rewards of public speaking. The susceptibility of the multitude to
this sort of guidance, their habit of requiring and enjoying the
stimulus which it supplied, and the open discussion, combining regular
forms with free opposition, of practical matters, political as well as
judicial, are the creative causes which formed such conspicuous Edition:
current; Page: [298] adepts in the art of persuasion. Nor was it only
professed orators who were thus produced. Didactic aptitude was formed
in the background, and the speculative tendencies were supplied with
interesting phenomena for observation and combination, at a time when
the truths of physical science were almost inaccessible. If the primary
effect was to quicken the powers of expression, the secondary, but not
less certain result, was to develope the habits of scientific thought.
Not only the oratory of Demosthenes and Pericles, and the colloquial
magic of Socrates, but also the philosophical speculations of Plato, and
the systematic politics, rhetoric, and logic of Aristotle, are traceable
to the same general tendencies in the minds of the Grecian people; and
we find the germ of these expansive forces in the senate and agora of
their legendary government.

(Vol. II, pp. 104-6.)

Incidental remarks of this nature, on the influence of circumstances in
forming the peculiar Grecian character and civilization, occur largely
in the first two chapters on historical Greece, viz. on its geography,
and on “the Hellenic people generally in the early historical times.”[*]
Mr. Grote does not give these speculations for more than they are worth.
He does not affect to exhaust the subject, nor pretends that the causes
he assigns account for the whole of the effect; butr points out the
natural tendencies of each influential fact, as it successively passes
under his review. The following is a favourable specimen:

The configuration of the Grecian territory, so like in many respects to
that of Switzerland, produced two effects of great moment upon the
character and history of the people. In the first place, it materially
strengthened their powers of defence; it shut up the country against
those invasions from the interior which successively subjugated all
their continental colonies; and it at the same time rendered each
fraction more difficult to be attacked by the rest, so as to exercise a
certain conservative influence in assuring the tenure of actual
possessors. But, in the next place, while it tended to protect each
section of Greeks from being conquered, it also kept them politically
disunited, and perpetuated their separate autonomy. It fostered that
powerful principle of repulsion, which disposed even the smallest
township to constitute itself a political unit apart from the rest, and
to resist all idea of coalescence with others, either amicable or
compulsory. To a modern reader, accustomed to large political
aggregations, and securities for good government through the
representative system, it requires a certain mental effort to transport
himself back to a time when even the smallest town clung so tenaciously
to its right of self-legislation. Nevertheless, such was the general
habit and feeling of the ancient world, throughout Italy, Sicily, Spain,
and Gaul: among the Hellenes it stands out more conspicuously, for
several reasons—first, because they seem to have pushed the
multiplication of autonomous units to an extreme point, seeing that even
islands not larger than Peparethos and Amorgos had two or three separate
city communities; secondly, because they produced, for the first time in
the history of mankind, acute systematic thinkers on matters of
government, amongst all of whom the idea of the autonomous city was
accepted as the indispensable basis of Edition: current; Page: [299]
political speculation; thirdly, because this incurable subdivision
proved finally the cause of their ruin, in spite of pronounced
intellectual superiority over their conquerors; and, lastly, because
incapacity of political coalescence did not preclude a powerful and
extensive sympathy between the inhabitants of all the separate cities,
with a constant tendency to fraternise for numerous purposes, social,
religious, recreative, intellectual, and æsthetical. . . .

Nor is it rash to suppose that the same [geographical] causes may have
tended to promote that unborrowed intellectual development for which
they stand so conspicuous. General propositions respecting the working
of climate and physical agencies upon character are indeed treacherous;
for our knowledge of the globe is now sufficient to teach us that heat
and cold, mountain and plain, sea and land, moist and dry atmosphere,
are all consistent with the greatest diversities of resident men. . . .
Nevertheless, we may venture to note certain improving influences,
connected with their geographical position, at a time when they had no
books to study, and no more advanced predecessors to imitate. We may
remark, first, that their position made them at once mountaineers and
mariners, thus supplying them with great variety of objects, sensations,
and adventures; next, that each petty community, nestled apart amidst
its own rocks, was sufficiently severed from the rest to possess an
individual life and attributes of its own, yet not so far as to subtract
it from the sympathies of the remainder; so that an observant Greek,
commercing with a great diversity of half-countrymen, whose language he
understood, and whose idiosyncracies he could appreciate, had access to
a larger mass of social and political experience than any other man in
so unadvanced an age could personally obtain. The Phœnician, superior to
the Greek on ship-board, traversed wider distances and saw a greater
number of strangers, but he had not the same means of intimate communion
with a multiplicity of fellows in blood and language: his relations,
confined to purchase and sale, did not comprise that mutuality of action
and reaction which pervaded the crowd at a Grecian festival. The scene
which here presented itself was a mixture of uniformity and variety
highly stimulating to the observant faculties of a man of genius,—who at
the same time, if he sought to communicate his own impressions, or to
act upon this mingled and diverse audience, was forced to shake off what
was peculiar to his own town or community, and to put forth matter in
harmony with the feelings of all.

(Vol. II, pp. 298-301.)

In the six concluding chapters of the second volume, Mr. Grote comprises
the sum of what is known respecting the early condition of those Grecian
States which have properly no history prior to the Persian invasion; and
brings down the history ofsthe Peloponesian Greekss to the age of Crœsus
and Pisistratus. The fragmentary nature of the information, and the
conscientious integrity of the author, who scruples to supply the
deficiency of certified facts by theory and conjecture, render these
chapters, with one exception, somewhat meagre. The exception is the
chapter which treats of the Legislation of Lycurgus, the earliest
Grecian event of first-rate historical importance.

Although of the personality of Lycurgus scarcely anything can be said to
be known, Mr. Grote entertains no doubt that such a person existed, and
Edition: current; Page: [300] that the peculiar Spartan institutions
were the work of a single legislator. Indeed, extraordinary as it may
seem that one man, or even a combination of men, should have had power
not merely to introduce, for that is little, but to give enduring
vitality to so singular a system of manners and institutions, the system
itself is so intensely artificial, that any more commonplace origin
would be still more improbable; it bespeaks in every part systematic
design.

The received view, however, of the Lycurgean reforms, and even of the
Spartan institutions, Mr. Grote shows to be, in one important point,
erroneous; the supposed equal division of landed property. He rejects
this, not on the score of improbability, for it is not in itself so hard
to believe as what Lycurgus really effected; but because no mention of
it is to be found in any Greek author who lived while the Lycurgean
institutions were still in force; and there is ample proof that neither
Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon, Isocrates, Plato, nor Aristotle knew of
any such equal division, either as connected with Lycurgus or with
Sparta. It rests on the sole testimony of Plutarch;[*] and Mr. Grote
believes it to have been an historic fancy, generated long after by the
regrets and aspirations of the patriotic party of which the reforming
kings, Agis and Cleomenes, were at the head.

Taking the condition of the city as it stood in the time of Agis III
(say about 250 bc), we know that its citizens had become few in number,
the bulk of them miserably poor, and all the land in a small number of
hands—the old discipline and the public mess (as far as the rich were
concerned) degenerated into mere forms—a numerous body of strangers or
non-citizens (the old xenêlasy, or prohibition of resident strangers,
being long discontinued) domiciled in the town, and forming a powerful
moneyed interest; and lastly, the dignity and ascendancy of the state
amongst its neighbours altogether ruined. It was insupportable to a
young enthusiast like king Agis, and to many ardent spirits among his
contemporaries, to contrast this degradation with the previous glories
of the country; and they saw no other way of reconstructing the old
Sparta except by again admitting the disfranchised poor citizens,
redividing the lands, cancelling all debts, and restoring the public
mess and military training in all their strictness. Agis endeavoured to
carry through these subversive measures, (such as no demagogue in the
extreme democracy of Athens would ever have ventured to glance at,) with
the consent of the senate and public assembly, and the acquiescence of
the rich. His sincerity is attested by the fact, that his own property,
and that of his female relatives, among the largest in the state, was
cast as the first sacrifice into the common stock. But he became the
dupe of unprincipled coadjutors, and perished in the unavailing attempt
to realize his scheme by persuasion. His successor Kleomenês afterwards
accomplished by violence a change substantially similar, though the
intervention of foreign arms speedily overthrew both himself and his
institutions.

Now it was under the state of public opinion which gave birth to these
projects of Agis and Kleomenês at Sparta, that the historic fancy,
unknown to Aristotle and his Edition: current; Page: [301] predecessors,
first gained ground, of the absolute equality of property as a primitive
institution of Lycurgus. How much such a belief would favour the schemes
of innovation, is too obvious to require notice; and, without supposing
any deliberate imposture, we cannot be astonished that the
predispositions of enthusiastic patriots interpreted according to their
own partialities an old unrecorded legislation from which they were
separated by more than five centuries. The Lycurgean discipline tended
forcibly to suggest to men’s minds the idea of equality among the
citizens,—that is, the negation of inequality not founded on some
personal attribute—inasmuch as it assimilated the habits, enjoyments,
and capacities of the rich to those of the poor; and the equality thus
existing in idea and tendency, which seemed to proclaim the wish of the
founder, was strained by the later reformers into a positive institution
which he had at first realized, but from which his degenerate followers
had receded. . . . We shall readily believe that [this hypothesis] would
find easy and sincere credence, when we recollect how many similar
delusions have obtained vogue in modern times far more favourable to
historical accuracy—how much false colouring has been attached by the
political feeling of recent days to matters of ancient history, such as
the Saxon Wittenagemote, the Great Charter, the rise and growth of the
English House of Commons, or even the Poor-law of Elizabeth.[*]

(Vol. II, pp. 527-30.)

The peculiarity of Sparta was not equality of fortunes, but a consistent
attempt to make rich and poor live exactly alike; and live not for
themselves, but as the creatures and instruments of the ideal being
called the State. The expedient used by the legislator to effect this,
was to destroy, not private property itself, but the possibility of any
separate enjoyment of it. By a stated contribution in kind from every
citizen, public tables were maintained, at which all Spartans, from
childhood to death, took regularly the same frugal meal. The Spartan
citizen

lived habitually in public, always either himself under drill, gymnastic
and military, or a critic and spectator of others—always under the
fetters and observances of a rule partly military, partly monastic,
estranged from the independence of a separate home, seeing his wife
during the first years after marriage, only by stealth, and maintaining
little peculiar relation with his children. The surveillance not only of
his fellow citizens, but also of authorised censors or captains
nominated by the state, was perpetually acting upon him; his day was
passed in public exercises and meals, his night in the public barrack to
which he belonged. . . .

The parallel of the Lycurgean institutions is to be found in the
Republic of Plato, who approves the Spartan principle of select
guardians, carefully trained and administering the community at
discretion; with this momentous difference indeed, that the Spartan
character formed by Lycurgus is of a low type, rendered savage and
fierce by exclusive and overdone bodily discipline, destitute even of
the elements of letters, immersed in their own narrowtspecialitiest, and
taught to despise all that lay beyond, possessing all the qualities
requisite to procure dominion, but none of those calculated to render
dominion popular or salutary to the subject; while the habits and
attributes of the guardians, as shadowed forth by Edition: current;
Page: [302] Plato, are enlarged as well as philanthropic, qualifying
them not simply to govern, but to govern for purposes protective,
conciliatory, and exalted. Both Plato and Aristotle conceived as the
perfection of society something of the Spartan type, a select body of
equally privileged citizens, disengaged from industrious pursuits, and
subjected to public and uniform training; both admit (with Lycurgus)
that the citizen belongs neither to himself, nor to his family, but to
his city; both at the same time note with regret, that the Spartan
training was turned only to one portion of human virtue, that which is
called forth in a state of war; the citizens were converted into a sort
of garrison, always under drill, and always ready to be called forth
either against Helots at home, or against enemies abroad. . . . When we
contemplate the general insecurity of Grecian life in the ninth or
eighth century before the Christian era, and especially the precarious
condition of a small band of Dorian conquerors in Sparta and its
district, with subdued Helots on their own lands, and Achæans unsubdued
all around them . . . the exclusive aim which Lycurgus proposed to
himself is easily understood; but what is truly surprising is the
violence of his means, and the success of the result. He realised his
project of creating in the 8000 or 9000 Spartan citizens unrivalled
habits of obedience, hardihood, self-denial, and military
aptitude—complete subjection on the part of each individual to the local
public opinion, and preference of death to the abandonment of Spartan
maxims—intense ambition on the part of every one to distinguish himself
within the prescribed sphere of duties, with little ambition for
anything else. In what manner so rigorous a system of individual
training can have been first brought to bear upon any community,
mastering the course of the thoughts and actions from boyhood to old
age—a work far more difficult than any political revolution—we are not
permitted to discover; nor does even the influence of an earnest and
energetic Herakleid man, seconded by the still more powerful working of
the Delphian god behind, upon the strong pious susceptibilities of the
Spartan mind, sufficiently explain a phenomenon so remarkable in the
history of mankind, unless we suppose them aided by some combination of
co-operating circumstances which history has not transmitted to us, and
preceded by disorders so exaggerated as to render the citizens glad to
escape from them at any price.

(Vol. II, pp. 505, 516-19.)

There is indeed no such instance of the wonderful pliability, and
amenability to artificial discipline, of the human mind, as is afforded
by the complete success of the Lacedæmonian legislator, for many
generations, in making the whole body of Spartan citizen at Sparta
exactly what he had intended to make them. At Sparta, it must be said;
for a Spartan out of Sparta, at least during his country’s ascendancy,
was not only the most domineering and arrogant, but in spite of, or
rather by a natural reaction from his ascetic training, the most
rapacious and corrupt of all Greeks: no one fell so easy a victim to the
temptations of luxury and splendour. Yet such habitual abnegation of
ordinary personal interests, and merging of self in an idea, were not
compatible with pettiness of mind. Most of the anecdotes and recorded
sayings of individual Lacedæmonians breathe a certain magnanimity of
spirit; although the Lacedæmonian State, which was the object of this
worship, and was accustomed not to give but to receive sacrifices, was
memorable for the peculiar pettiness of its political conduct—a
selfishness so excessive, as, by the blindness and even the Edition:
current; Page: [303] un-Spartan cowardice which it engendered,
perpetually to frustrate its own ends.

Such were the Spartans; those hereditary Tories and Conservatives of
Greece; objects of exaggerated admiration to the moralists and
philosophers of the far nobler as well as greater and wiser Athens;
because the second-rate superior minds of a cultivated age and nation
are usually in exaggerated opposition against its spirit; and lean
towards the faults contrary to those against which they are daily
contending. To men who felt called upon to stand up for Law against
Will, and for traditional wisdom against the subtleties of sophists and
the arts of rhetoricians, Sparta was the standing model of reverence for
law, and attachment to ancient maxims. The revolutions which incessantly
menaced every other Grecian state, and from which even Athens was not
wholly secure, never threatened Sparta. The steadiness of the Spartan
polity, and the constancy of Spartan maxims, were to the Greeks highly
imposing phenomena. “It was the only government in Greece which could
trace an unbroken peaceable descent from a high antiquity, and from its
real or supposed founder;” and this, we think with Mr. Grote, was one of
the main causes

of the astonishing ascendancy which the Spartans acquired over the
Hellenic mind, and which they will not be found at all to deserve by any
superior ability in the conduct of affairs. The steadiness of their
political sympathies—exhibited at one time by putting down the tyrants
or despots, at another by overthrowing the democracies—stood in the
place of ability; and even the recognised failings of their government
were often covered by the sentiment of respect for its early
commencement and uninterrupted continuance.

(Vol. II, p. 477.)

The reader who is conversant with the existing state of knowledge
respecting the Grecian world, will gather from what has been laid before
him, that as a contribution to that knowledge, the present work is of
high performance and still higher promise. The author is not surpassed
even by German scholarship, in intimate and accurate acquaintance with
the whole field of Greek literature and antiquity; while none of his
predecessors have approached to him in the amount of philosophy and
general mental accomplishment which he has brought to bear upon the
subject.u

It has been made an objection to the volumes now published, that they
contain a greater amount of dissertation than of history.[*] To such
objectors it may be replied, that for the times here treated of, a
continuous Edition: current; Page: [304] stream of narrative is not
possible; that those who desire nothing from history but an amusing
story, may find such abundantly provided elsewhere; that it is as much
an historian’s duty to judge as to narrate, to prove as to assert; and
that the same critics would be the first to reproach a writer who should
substitute for the commonly received view of the facts a view of his
own, without showing by what evidence he was prepared to substantiate
it. There is in this case, too, the further peculiarity, that what is
brought forward as matter of evidence, is itself almost always part and
parcel of the exposition of the Greek mind; and on this score alone, no
one who wishes to understand what Greece was, would desire to see one
page of Mr. Grote’s argumentative chapters expunged.v

In the present volumes the style is clear, unaffected, and often very
apt and vigorous. If we have a complaint to make, it would be of the too
frequent employment of words of Greek or Latin origin; some of them
recognised English words, though not in common use, but others purely of
his own invention, and unintelligible except to scholars. In some cases,
doubtless, the words are needed, and carry their explanation along with
them: such a word as “autonomous,” conveying a political idea not
exactly expressed by any modern word or phrase, is its own sufficient
justification; and the same may be said of “gens,” a word borrowed from
Roman history, to express a combination of religious and political ideas
familiar to antiquity, and the same, substantially, which Niebuhr has
proved that the term denoted at Rome.[*] But many cases would be found
in a careful revisal of these volumes, in which similar hard words are
used to convey a meaning which might be perfectly expressed by phrases
generally intelligible.w

Edition: current; Page: [305]

Edition: current; Page: [306] Edition: current; Page: [307]


GROTE’S HISTORY OF GREECE [II]
 1853

Edition: current; Page: [308]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Dissertations and Discussions, II (1867), 510-54, where under the title,
“Grote’s History of Greece,” appears “Vols. IX. X. XI.” Reprinted from
Edinburgh Review, XCVIII (Oct., 1853), 425-47, where it is headed “Art.
V.—History of Greece. By George Grote, Esq. Vols. ix, x, xi. London:
[Murray,] 1852-53”; running heads “Grote’s History of Greece, Vols. IX.
X. XI.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A review of vols. 9, 10 &
11 of Grote’s History of Greece, in the Edinburgh Review for October
1853” (MacMinn, 79). There are no corrections or alterations in the copy
of the Edinburgh article in the Somerville College Library.

In the footnoted variants, “59” indicates D&D, II (1st ed.); “67”
indicates D&D, II (2nd ed., the copy-text); “53” indicates Edinburgh
Review. JSM quotes in several places from his earlier Spectator reviews
of Grote’s History, and elsewhere paraphrases passages from those
reviews. The relevant passages are indicated as variants, with the
particular issue of the Spectator given in the note covering the whole
passage; in the variants within quoted passages “S” indicates the
Spectator, without date. For comment on the composition of the essay and
related matters, see the Introduction and the Textual Introduction,
xxxiii-xxxvii and lxxxvi-lxxxix above.

Edition: current; Page: [309]


Grote’s History of Greece [II]*

in his eighth volume, Mr. Grote brought the narrative of Grecian History
to its great turning point—the subjugation of Athens by the Spartans and
their confederates; including, as the immediate sequel of that event,
the sanguinary tyranny of the Thirty—the rapid reaction in Grecian
feeling—the return of the exiles under Thrasybulus, subsequently known
at Athens by the designation of “those from Phyle” or “those from
Piræus”—the restoration of Athens, under the tolerance of Sparta, to
internal freedom though denuded of empire, and the inauguration of a new
era of concord by the healing measures which made the archonship of
Euclides memorable to succeeding generations. The recital of these
stirring events was immediately followed by those admirable chapters on
the Sophists and on Socrates, which may be pronounced the most important
portion yet written of this History; whether we consider the intrinsic
interest of their subjects—the deep-rooted historical errors which they
tend to dispel—or the great permanent instruction contained in their
display of the characteristics of one of the most eminent men who ever
lived—a man unique in history, of a kind at all times needful, and
seldom more needed than now.†

Edition: current; Page: [310]
The three volumes which we have here to notice contain no delineations
belonging to the same elevated rank with that which closed so
impressively the volume immediately preceding. The exposition and
estimate of Plato, which alone would have afforded similar
opportunities, though falling within the chronological period comprised
in the eleventh volume, is not included in it, but reserved for one yet
to come;[*] except in so far as the philosopher is personally involved
in the series of Sicilian transactions, through his connexion with Dion,
whose remarkable and eminently tragic character and career form the
centre of interest in the most striking chapter of these volumes.[†]
There is little scope in this portion of the work for bringing
prominently forward any great ethical or philosophical ideas; and the
illustrations it contains of Grecian character and institutions relate
principally to points which the author had largely illustrated before.
In no other part of the book is the continuity of the narrative so
little broken by Edition: current; Page: [311] dissertation or
discussion; but in the rapid succession of animating incidents, and the
living display of interesting individual characters, these volumes are
not inferior to any of the preceding.

They commence with the expedition of Cyrus, and the retreat of Xenophon
and the Ten Thousand: an episode fertile in exemplifications of Grecian
and of Asiatic characteristics, and especially valuable as being the
only detailed account of the personal adventures of any body of Greeks,
or even of any individual Greek, which has been directly transmitted to
us by an eye-witness and actor.[*] Next follows the history of the
short-lived Lacedæmonian ascendancy; its deplorable abuse, and the
conspicuous Nemesis which fell on that selfish and domineering
community, by the irreparable prostration of her power through the arms
of Thebes, so many years the firm ally of Sparta, and for her
treacherous conduct to whom, even more than for any other of her
misdeeds, she, in the general opinion of Greece, deserved her fate. The
chapters which describe this contest, relate also the resurrection of
Athens, and her reattainment, in diminished measure and for a brief
period, of something like imperial dignity. At this halting-place Mr.
Grote suspends the main course of his narrative, and takes up the thread
of the history of the Sicilian Greeks; the most interesting part of
whose story is included in the present volumes. He illustrates, by the
conduct and fortunes of the elder Dionysius, the successive stages of
the “despot’s progress.”[†] Here, too, the avenging Nemesis attends;
but, as usual with the misdeeds of rulers, the punishment is vicarious.
The younger Dionysius, a weak and self-indulgent, but good-natured and
rather well-meaning inheritor of despotic power, suffered the penalty of
the usurpation and the multiplied tyrannies of his energetic and
unscrupulous father. The decline and fall of the Dionysian dynasty, and
the restoration of Sicilian freedom, are related by Mr. Grote in his
best style of ethical narrative, and with a biographical interest equal
to the historical. For, as the chapters on the fall of Sparta are
animated and exalted by the great qualities of Epaminondas—the first of
Greeks in military genius, surpassed only by Pericles in comprehensive
statesmanship, yet even more honourably distinguished among Grecian
politicians by the unostentatious disinterestedness of his public
virtue, and the gentleness and generosity of his sentiments towards
opponents; so the Sicilian chapters are lighted up, first by the
high-minded but chequered, and even in his errors eminently interesting,
character of Dion, and afterwards by the steadier and more unmixed
brilliancy of the real liberator of Sicily, the wise, just, and heroic
Timoleon.

Edition: current; Page: [312]
Last comes that gloomy period of Grecian history, the age of Philip of
Macedon: during which, enfeebled by the long and destructive wars which
had successively prostrated every one of her leading states, Greece fell
a prey to an able and enterprising neighbour, who, at the head of a
numerous population of hardy warriors implicitly obedient to his will,
was enabled to turn her own military arts and discipline against
herself. At the time when Philip commenced his career of aggrandisement,
the only Grecian state in a condition to meet him with anything like
equality of strength was Athens; still free and prosperous, but so
lowered in public spirit and moral energy, that she threw away all her
opportunities, and only rallied with a vigour worthy of her ancestors
when it was too late to do more than perish honourably. These sad
events, so far as their course can be traced through the extreme
imperfection of our information, are related by Mr. Grote down to the
fatal day of Chæroneia. And neither is this melancholy recital destitute
of the relief afforded by the appearance on the scene of an illustrious
character. Even in that age Athens possessed a man, of whom posterity
has ratified the proud boast, drawn from him in self-vindication, that
if there had been one such man in every state of Greece, or even in
Thessaly and Arcadiadaloned, the attempts of Philip to reduce the Greeks
to subjugation would have been frustrated. What one man, of boundless
energy, far-reaching political vision, and an eloquence unmatched even
at Athens, could do to save Greece from an inevitable doom, Demosthenes
did. His life was an incessant struggle against the fatality of the
time, and the weaknesses of his countrymen. And though he failed in his
object, and perished with the last breath of the freedom for which he
had lived, he has been rewarded by that immortal fame, which, as he
reminded the Athenians in the most celebrated passage of his greatest
oration,[*] is not deserved only by the successful; and which he merited
not more by his unequalled oratorical eminence, than by the fact, that
not one mean, or selfish, or narrow, or ungenerous sentiment is appealed
to throughout those splendid addresses, in which he strove to rouse and
nerve his countrymen to the contest, or proudly mourned over its
unsuccessful issue.

The Chæroneian catastrophe closes the epoch of Grecian history. Though
much that is highly interesting remains, its interest is derived from
other sources; the diffusion of Greek civilization through the Eastern
nations by the expedition of Alexander and its consequences, and a few
noble but vain efforts, against insuperable obstacles, in Greece itself,
to Edition: current; Page: [313] regain a freedom and national
independence irrecoverably lost. Of the period of Grecian greatness, we
have now from Mr. Grote the completed history. We have the budding, the
blossoming, and the decay and death. The fruits which survived—the
permanent gifts bequeathed by Greece to the world, and constituting the
foundation of all subsequent intellectual achievements—these he has not
yet, or has only partially, characterised. But he has produced a
finished picture of the political and collective life of Greece, and the
distinctive characters of the form of social existence, during and by
means of which she accomplished things so far transcending what has ever
elsewhere been achieved in so marvellously short a space of time. From
the legislation of Solon to the field of Marathon, a hundred years of
preparation; from Marathon to Chæroneia, barely a hundred and fifty
years of maturity:—that century and a half is all that separates the
earliest recorded prose writing from Demosthenes and Aristotle, all that
lies between the first indication to the outer world of what Greece was
destined to be, and her absorption by a foreign conqueror. A momentous
interval, which decided for an indefinite period the question, whether
the human race was to be stationary or progressive. That the former
condition is far more congenial to ordinary human nature than the
latter, experience unfortunately places beyond doubt; and history points
out no other people in the ancient world who had any spring of
unborrowed progress within themselves. We have no knowledge of any other
source from which freedom and intellectual cultivation could have come,
any other means by which the light never since extinguished might have
been kindled, if the world had been left, without any elements of
Grecian origin, to be fought for between the unlettered Romans and the
priest-led and despot-governed Asiatics. The people and the period on
which this depended, must be important to posterity as long as any
portion of the past continues to be remembered: and by the aid of Mr.
Grote, we are now enabled to see them with a clearness and accuracy, and
judge them with a largeness of comprehension, never before approached.

To disparage what mankind owe to Greece, because she has not left for
their imitation a perfect type of human character, nor a highly improved
pattern of social institutions, would be to demand from the early youth
of the human race what is far from being yet realized in its more
advanced age. It would better become us to consider whether we have, in
these particulars, advanced as much beyond the best Grecian model, as
might with reason have been expected after more than twenty centuries;
whether, having done no more than we have done with all that we have
inherited from the Greeks, and all that has been since superadded to
their teachings, we ought not to look up with reverent admiration to a
people, who, without any of our adventitious helps, and without the
stimulus of preceding Edition: current; Page: [314] example, moved
forward by their native strength at so gigantic a pace, though in an
earlier portion of the path. It is true, that in institutions, in
manners, and even in the ideal standard of human character as existing
in the best minds, there is an improvement. All the great thinkers and
heroic lives, from Christ downward, would have done little for humanity,
if after two thousand years no single point could be added to the type
of excellence conceived by Socrates or Plato. But it is not the moral
conceptions of heroes or philosophers which measure the difference
between one age and another, so much as the accepted popular standard of
virtuous conduct. Taking that as the criterion, and comparing the best
Grecian with the best modern community, is the superiority wholly on the
side of the moderns? Has there not been deterioration as well as
improvement, and the former perhaps almost as marked as the latter?
There is more humanity, more mildness of manners, though this only from
a comparatively recent date; the sense of moral obligation is more
cosmopolitan, and depends less for its acknowledgment on the existence
of some special tie. But we greatly doubt if most of the positive
virtues were not better conceived, and more highly prized, by the public
opinion of Greece than by that of Great Britain; while negative and
passive qualities have now engrossed the chief part of the honour paid
to virtue; and it may be questioned if even private duties are, on the
whole, better understood, while duties to the public, unless in cases of
special trust, have almost dropped out of the catalogue: that idea, so
powerful in the free States of Greece, has faded into a mere rhetorical
ornament.

In political and social organization, the moderns, or some of them at
least, have a more unqualified superiority over the Greeks. They have
succeeded in making free institutions possible in large territories; and
they have learnt to live and be prosperous without slaves. The
importance of these discoveries—for discoveries they were—hardly admits
of being overrated. For want of the first, Greece lost her freedom, her
virtue, and her very existence as a people; and slavery was the greatest
blot in her institutions while she existed. It is sufficient merely to
mention another great blot, the domestic and social condition of women
(on which point, however, Sparta, in a degree surprising for the age,
formed an honourable exception); since, in this respect, the superiority
of modern nations is not so much greater as might be supposed. Even on
the subject of slavery there are many, and not inconsiderable
palliations. Slavery in the ancient, as in the Oriental world, was a
very different thing from American or West Indian slavery. The slaves
were not a separate race, marked out to the contempt of their masters by
indelible physical differences. When manumitted, they mixed on equal
terms with the general community; and though, in Greece, seldom
admitted, any more than other aliens, to the complete political
franchise of their patron’s city, they could generally Edition: current;
Page: [315] become full citizens of some new colony, or be placed on the
roll of some old commonwealth recruiting its numbers after a disaster.
The facility with which, in these small territories, slaves could escape
across the frontier, must, at the worst, have been a considerable check
to ill usage. The literature of the Athenians proves that they not only
cultivated, but counted on finding, moral virtues in their slaves, which
is not consistent with the worst form of slavery. Neither, in Greece,
did slavery produce that one of its effects by which, above all, it is
an obstacle to improvement—that of making bodily labour dishonourable.
Nowhere in Greece, except at Sparta, was industry, however mechanical,
regarded as unworthy of a freeman, or even of a citizen; least of all at
Athens, in whose proudest times a majority of the Demos consisted of
free artisans. Doubtless, however, in Greece as elsewhere, slavery was
an odious institution; and its inherent evils are in no way lessened by
the admission, that as a temporary fact, in an early and rude state of
the arts of life, it may have been, nevertheless, a great accelerator of
progress. If we read history with intelligence, we are led to think
concerning slavery as concerning many other bad institutions, that the
error was not so great of first introducing it, as of continuing it too
long.

Though Grecian history is crowded with objects of interest, all others
are eclipsed by Athens. Whatever in Greece most merits the gratitude of
posterity, Athens possessed in fullest measure. If the Hellenic nation
is in history the main source and most conspicuous representative of
progress, Athens may claim the same honourable position in regard to
Greece itself; for all the Greek elements of progress, in their highest
culmination, were united in that illustrious city. This was not the
effect of an original superiority of natural endowments in the Athenian
mind. In the first exuberant outpourings of Grecian genius, Athens bore
no more than her share, if even so much. The many famous poets and
musicians who preceded the era of Marathon, the early speculators in
science and philosophy, and even the first historians, were scattered
through all the divisions of the Greek name; with a preponderance on the
side of the Ionians of Asia Minor, the Sicilian and Italian Greeks, and
the islanders, all of whom attained prosperity much earlier, as well as
lost it sooner, than the inhabitants of Continental Greece. Even Bœotia
produced two poets of the first rank, Pindar and Corinna, at a time when
Attica had only yet produced one.* By degrees, however, the whole
intellect of Greece, except the purely practical, gravitated to Edition:
current; Page: [316] Athens; until, in the maturity of Grecian culture,
all the great writers, speakers, and thinkers were educated, and nearly
all of them were born and passed their lives, in that centre of
enlightenment. Of the other Greek states, such as were oligarchically
governed contributed little or nothing, except in a military point of
view, to make Greece illustrious. Even those among them which, like
Sparta, were to a certain degree successful in providing for stability,
did nothing for progress, further than supplying materials of study and
experience to the great Athenian thinkers and their disciples. Of the
other democracies, not one enjoyed the Eunomia, the unimpeded authority
of law, and freedom from factious violence, which were quite as
characteristic of Athens as either her liberty or her genius; and which,
making life and property more secure than in any other part of the
Grecian world, afforded the mental tranquillity which is also one of the
conditions of high intellectual or imaginative achievement.

While Grecian history, considered philosophically, is thus almost
concentrated in Athens, so also, considered æsthetically, it is an epic,
of which Athens, as a collective personality, may be called the hero.
The fate of Athens speaks to the imagination and sympathies like that of
the Achilles or Odysseus of an heroic poem; absorbing into itself even
the interest excited by the long series of eminent Athenians, who seem
rather like successive phases under which Athens appears to us, than
individuals independent and apart from it. Nowhere does history present
to us a collective body so abounding in human nature as the Athenian
Demos. In them all the capacities, all the impulses and
susceptibilities, the strength and the infirmities, of human character,
stand out in large and bold proportions. There is nothing that they do
not seem capable of understanding, of feeling, and of executing; nothing
generous or heroic to which they might not be roused; and scarcely any
act of folly, injustice, or ferocity into which they could not be
hurried, when no honest and able adviser was at hand to recal them to
their better nature. Ever variable, according to the character of the
leading minister of the time; alike prudent and enterprising under the
guidance of a Pericles; carelessly inert or rashly ambitious when their
most influential politicians were a Nicias and an Alcibiades; yet never
abdicating their own guidance, always judging for themselves, and,
though often wrong, seldom choosing the worst side when there was any
one present capable of advocating the better. Light-hearted too, full of
animal spirits and joyousness; revelling in the fun of hearing rival
orators inveigh against each other; bursting with laughter at the
mingled floods of coarse buffoonery and fine wit poured forth by the
licensed libellers of their comic stage against their orators and
statesmen, their poets, their gods, and even themselves—“that angry,
waspish, intractable little old man, Demos of Edition: current; Page:
[317] Pnyx,”* the well-known laughing-stock of one of the most
successful comedies of Aristophanes. They are accused of fickleness; but
Mr. Grote has shown on how false an estimate of historical facts that
imputation rests,† and that they were much rather remarkable for the
constancy of their attachments. They were not fickle, but (a very
different quality, vulgarly confounded with it) mobile; keenly
susceptible individually, and of necessity still more collectively, to
the feeling and impression of the moment. The Demos may be alternately
likened to the commonly received idea of a man, a woman, or a child, but
never a clown or a boor. Right or wrong, wise or foolish, Athenians are
never ἀπαίδευτοι; theirs are never the errors of untaught or unexercised
minds. They are always the same Athenians who have thrilled with the
grandeur and pathos of Æschylus and Sophocles, who were able to ransom
themselves from captivity by reciting the verses of Euripides, who have
had Pericles or Demosthenes for their daily instructor and adviser, and
have heard every species of judicial case, public and private, civil and
criminal, propounded for their decision, in the most finished
compositions ever spoken to a public assembly. They are the same
Athenians, too, who live and move among the visible memorials of
ancestors, the greatest of whose glories was that they had dared and
suffered all things rather than desert the liberty of Greece. Their just
pride in such progenitors, and their sense of what was due to the
dignity and fame of their city, were ever ready to be evoked for any
noble cause. Even at the last, when their energies, too late aroused,
had been insufficient to save them, and they lay crushed at the feet of
a conqueror, they earned the admiration of posterity by bestowing,
instead of displeasure, additional distinctions on the author and
adviser of the struggle which had preserved their honour, though not
their safety or their freedom.

In every respect Athens deserved the high commendation given her by
Pericles in his Funeral Oration, of being the educator of Greece.‡ And
we cannot better set forth the characteristics of this great
commonwealth at its greatest period, than by following Mr. Grote in
quoting some passages from that celebrated discourse.

Edition: current; Page: [318]
We live under a constitution such as noway to envy the laws of our
neighbours—ourselves an example to others rather than imitators. It is
called a democracy, since its aim tends towards the Many, and not
towards the Few; in regard to private matters and disputes, the laws
deal equally with every one; while in respect to public dignity and
importance, the position of each is determined, not by class influence,
but by worth, according as his reputation stands in his particular
department; nor does poverty or obscure station keep him back, if he has
any capacity of benefiting the state.efAnd ourf social march is free,
not merely in regard to public affairs, but also in regard togtoleranceg
of each other’s diversity ofhtastes andh pursuits. For we are not angry
with our neighbour for what heidoesi to please himself, nor do wej put
on those sour looks, whichkare offensive, though they do no positive
damagek.e Thus conducting our private social intercourse with reciprocal
indulgence, we are restrained from misconduct in public matters by fear
and reverence of our magistrates for the time being, and of our laws,
especially such laws as are instituted for the protection of the
wronged, and such as, though unwritten, are enforced by a common sense
of shame. Besides this, we have provided for our minds numerous
recreations from toil, partly by our customary solemnities of sacrifice
and festival throughout the year, partly by the elegance of our private
arrangements, the daily charm of which banishes pain and annoyance. From
the magnitude of our city, the products of the whole earth are brought
to us, so that our enjoyment of foreign luxuries is as much our own and
assured, as of those which we produce at home. In respect to training
for war, we differ from our opponents (the Lacedæmonians) on several
material points. First, we lay open our city as a common resort; we
apply no xenelasy to exclude any one from any lesson or spectacle, for
fear lest an enemy should see and profit by it: for we trust less to
manœuvres and artifices, than to native boldness of spirit, for warlike
efficiency. Next, in regard to education, while the Lacedæmonians even
from their earliest youth subject themselves to an irksome exercise for
the attainment of courage, we, with our easy habits of life, are not
less prepared than they to encounter all perils within the measure of
our strength. . . .

We combine taste for the beautiful with frugality of life, and cultivate
intellectual speculation without being enervated: we employ wealth for
the service of our occasions, not for the ostentation of talk; nor is it
disgraceful to any one who is poor to confess himself so, though he may
be blamed for not actively bestirring himself to get rid of his poverty.
Our politicians are not exempted from attending to their private
affairs, and our private citizens have a competent knowledge of public
matters; for we stand alone in regarding the man who keeps aloof from
politics, not as a blameless person, but as a useless one. Far from
accounting discussion an impediment to action, we think it an evil not
to have been instructed by deliberation before the time for execution
arrives. For, in truth, we combine in a remarkable manner boldness in
action with full debate beforehand on that which we are going about:
whereas with others ignorance alone imparts daring, debate induces
hesitation. Assuredly those ought to be regarded as the stoutest of
heart, who, knowing Edition: current; Page: [319] most accurately both
the terrors of war and the sweets of peace, are still not the less
willing to encounter peril.*

This picture, drawn by Pericles and transmitted by Thucydides, of ease
of living, and freedom from social intolerance, combined with the
pleasures of cultivated taste, and a lively interest and energetic
participation in public affairs, is one of the most interesting passages
in Greek history: placed, as it is, in the speech in which the first of
Athenian statesmen professed to show “by what practices and by what
institutions and manners the city had become great.”† This remarkable
testimony, as Mr. Grote has not failed to point out, wholly conflicts,
so far as Athens is concerned, with what we are so often told about the
entire sacrifice, in the ancient republics, of the liberty of the
individual to an imaginary good of the state. In the greatest Greek
commonwealth, as described by its most distinguished citizen, the public
interest was held of paramount obligation in all things which concerned
it; but, with that part of the conduct of individuals which concerned
only themselves, public opinion did not interfere: while in the ethical
practice of the moderns, this is exactly reversed, and no one is
required by opinion to pay any regard to the public, except by
conducting his own private concerns in conformity to its expectations.
On this vital question of social morals, Mr. Grote’s remarks, though
belonging to an earlier volume than those which we are reviewing, are
too valuable, as well as too much to the purpose, to require any apology
for quoting them.

lmThem stress which hen[Pericles]n lays upon the liberty of thought and
action at Athens, not merely from excessive restraint of law, but also
from practical intolerance between man and man, and tyranny of the
majority over individual dissenters in taste andopursuitso, deserves
serious notice, and brings out one of those Edition: current; Page:
[320] points in the national character upon which the intellectual
development of the time mainly depended. The national temper was
indulgent in a high degree to all the varieties of positive impulses:
the peculiar promptings in every individual bosom were allowed to
manifest themselves and bear fruit, without being suppressed by external
opinion, or trained into forced conformity with some assumed standard:
antipathies against any of them formed no part of the habitual morality
of the citizen. While much of the generating causes of human hatred was
thus rendered inoperative, and while society was rendered more
comfortable, more instructive, and more stimulating, all its germs of
productive fruitful genius, so rare everywhere, found in such an
atmosphere the maximum of encouragement. Within the limits of the law,
assuredly as faithfully observed at Athens as anywhere in Greece,
individual impulse, taste, and even eccentricity, were accepted with
indulgence, instead of being a mark, as elsewhere, for the intolerance
of neighbours or of the public. This remarkable feature in Athenian life
will help us in a future chapter to explain the striking career of
Socrates; and itpfartherp presents to us under another face, a great
part of that which the censors of Athens denounced under the name of
“democratical licence.” The liberty and diversity of individual life in
that city were offensive to Xenophon, Plato, and Aristotle—attached
either to the monotonous drill of Sparta, or to some other ideal
standard, which, though much better than the Spartan in itself, they
were disposed to impress upon society with a heavy-handed uniformity.
That liberty of individual action, not merely from the over-restraints
of law, but from the tyranny of jealous opinion, such as Pericles
depicts in Athens, belongs more naturally to a democracy, where there is
no select One or Few to receive worship and set the fashion, than to any
other form of government. But it is very rare even in democracies: nor
can we dissemble the fact, that none of the governments of modern times,
democratical, aristocratical, or monarchical, presents anything like the
picture of generous tolerance towards social dissent, and spontaneity of
individual taste, which we read in the speech of the Athenian statesman.
In all of them, the intolerance of the national opinion cuts down
individual character to one out of a few set types, to which every
person, or every family, is constrained to adjust itself, and beyond
which all exceptions meet either with hatred or with derision. To impose
upon men such restraints, either of law or of opinion, as are requisite
for the security and comfort of society, but to encourage rather than
repress the free play of individual impulse subject to those limits, is
an ideal which, if it was ever approached at Athens, has certainly never
been attained, and has indeed comparatively been little studied or cared
for, in any modern society.

(Vol. VI, pp. 200-2.)l

qrThe difference here pointed out between the temper of the Athenian and
that of the modern mind, is most closely connected with the wonderful
display of individual genius which made Athens illustrious, and with the
comparative mediocrity of modern times. Originality is not always
genius, but genius is always originality; and a society which looks
jealously and distrustfully on original people—which imposes its common
level of opinion, Edition: current; Page: [321] feeling, and conduct, on
all its individual members—may have the satisfaction of thinking itself
very moral and respectable, but it must do without genius. It may have
persons of talent, who bring a larger than usual measure of commonplace
ability into the service of the common notions of the time; but genius,
in such a soil, is either fatally stunted in its growth, or if its
native strength forbids this, it usually retires into itself, and dies
without a sign.q

The ambitious external policy of Athens is one of the points in Greek
history which have been most perversely misjudged and misunderstood.
Modern historians seem to have succeeded to the jealous animosity of the
Corinthians, and other members of the Spartan alliance, at the opening
of the Peloponnesian war, though by no means at one with them in the
reasons they are able to assign for it. The Athenians certainly were not
exempt from the passion, universal in the ancient world, for conquest
and dominion. It was a blemish, when judged by the universal standard of
right; but as a fact, it was most beneficial to the world, and could not
have been other than it was without crippling them in their vocation as
the organ of progress. There was scarcely a possibility of permanent
improvement for mankind, until intellect had first asserted its
superiority, even in a military sense, over brute force. With the
barbarous part of the species pressing in allsarounds, to crush every
early germ of improvement, all would have been lost if there had not
also been an instinct in the better and more gifted portions of mankind
to push for dominion over the duller and coarser. Besides, in a small
but flourishing free community like Athens, ambition was the simple
dictate of prudence. No such community could have had any safety for its
own freedom, but by acquiring power. Instead of reprobating the Athenian
maritime empire, the whole of mankind, beginning with the subject states
themselves, had cause to lament that it was not much longer continued;
for that the fate of Greek civilization was bound up with it, is proved
by the whole course oftthet history. When the jealousies of the other
Greek states stripped Athens of her empire, and nominally restored the
subject allies to an independence which they were wholly incapable of
maintaining, Greece lost her sole chance of making successful head
against Macedonia or Rome. And considering what the short period of
Athenian greatness has done for the world, it is painful to think in how
much more advanced a stage human improvement might now have been, if the
Athens of Pericles could have lived on in undiminished spirit and energy
for but one century more.

The Athenian empire was the purest in its origin of all the empires of
antiquity. It was at first a free and equal confederacy for defence
against the Edition: current; Page: [322] Persians, organized by
Aristides with a justice worthy of his name. It never would have become
anything else, but that the majority of the allies, consisting of the
comparatively unwarlike anduunenergeticuvAsiaticv Greeks, chose to make
their contribution in money instead of personal service, preferring to
pay Athens for protecting them, rather than protect themselves. Even the
removal of the treasury of the confederacy from Delos to Athens was no
act of the Athenians, but of the synod of the confederacy, on the
proposition of Samos. When, at a later date, some of the states
attempted to secede from the alliance, and enjoy the peace and security
which it afforded, without sharing in the cost, the general sentiment of
the confederates at first went along with Athens in bringing back the
recusants by force of arms. But, with these small town communities, to
be defeated was to be conquered, and the conquered, by the universal
custom of antiquity, received the law from the conqueror. That law, in
the case of Athens, was only occasionally either harsh or onerous; yet
thus, by degrees, the once equal allies sunk into tributaries. The few
who had neither revolted, nor commuted personal service for pecuniary
payment, retained their naval and military force, and their immunity
from tribute, and had nothing to complain of, but that, like the
dependencies of England or of any modern nation, they were compelled to
join in the wars of the dominant state, without having any voice in
deciding them. They do not seem to have alleged any other practical
grievances against the Athenian community: their complaints, recorded by
Thucydides, turn almost solely upon offence to the Grecian sentiment of
city independence and dignity. Under the protection of the powerful
Athenian navy, the allied states enjoyed a security never before known
in Greece, and which no one of them could possibly have acquired by its
own efforts. Many of them grew rich and prosperous. With their internal
government Athens, as a general rule, did not interfere; in Mr. Grote’s
opinion, not even to make it democratical, when it did not happen to be
so already. Like all the weak states of antiquity, whether called
independent or not, they were liable to extortion and oppression; not,
however, from the Athenian people, but from rich and powerful Athenians
in command of expeditions, against whom the Demos, when judicially
appealed to, was ready to give redress. The most express testimony is
borne to this general fact by the able oligarchical conspirator
Phrynichus, as reported by the oligarchically inclined Thucydides, in
his account of that remarkable incident in Athenian history, the
revolution of the Four Hundred. The historian represents Phrynichus as
reminding his fellow-conspirators that they could expect neither
assistance nor good-will from the allies, since these well knew that it
was from the oligarchical Edition: current; Page: [323] Athenians they
were liable to injury, and looked upon the Demos as their protector.*
The reality of the protection is exemplified by the case of Paches, the
victorious general who had just before captured Mitylene. The resentment
of the Athenians against that revolted city was such, that they were (as
is well known) persuaded by Cleon to pass a decree for putting the whole
military population to death, though they recalled the mandate before it
had been executed. Yet, Paches having abused his victory by violating
two women of Mitylenew(having first put their husbands to death)w was
prosecuted by them before the Athenian dicastery, and the facts being
proved, was so overwhelmed by the general burst of indignation, that he
slew himself in open court. This incident (which until its real
circumstances had been hunted out by Niebuhr,[*] was one of the stock
examples of Athenian and popular ingratitude) is a striking illustration
of the difference between the Athenian empire and the Lacedæmonian; for
when Spartan citizens, in repeated instances, committed similar
enormities, not against conquered enemies but friendly allies, no
redress could be obtained. It required the field of Leuctra to avenge
the daughters of Skedasus, or appease the manes of the victims of the
harmost Aristodemus.

However unpopular the dominion of Athens may have been among her
subjects, though it appears to have been so with the leading men rather
than with the majority, they had reason enough to regret it after it was
at an end; for not only was the little finger of Lacedæmon heavier than
the whole body of Athens, but many of them only exchanged Greek dominion
for that of the barbarians. Sparta was never able, for more than a few
years, to protect the Asiatic Greeks even against Persia; and at the
height of her power, as soon as the obligation of defending them became
inconvenient, she, by the peace of Antalcidas, actually ceded the whole
of that great division of Greece to the Persian king,[†] to whom it
remained subject until the invasion of Alexander. Several of the most
prosperous of the islanders fared no better: Cos, Chios, and Rhodes,
when by the Social War they succeeded in Edition: current; Page: [324]
detaching themselves from the second Athenian empire, fell almost
immediately into dependence on the Carian despot Mausolus, against whom
the Rhodians had soon to appeal again to their enemy, Athens, for
assistance. So mere a name was that universal autonomy, which was used
so successfully to stir up the feelings of the Hellenic world against
its noblest member; so entirely did the independence of Greece turn on
the maintenance of some cohesion among her multifarious particles, while
the political instincts of her people obstinately rejected the merging
of the single city-republic in any larger unity.

The intellectual and moral pre-eminence which made Athens the centre of
good to Greece, and of the good to after-generations of which Greece has
been the medium, was wholly the fruit of Athenian institutions. It was
the consequence, first of democracy, and secondly, of the wise and
well-considered organization, by which the Athenian democracy was
distinguished among the democratic constitutions of antiquity. The term
democracy may perhaps be deemed inapplicable to any of the Grecian
governments, on account of the existence of slavery; and it is
inapplicable to them, in the purest and most honourable sense of the
term. But in another sense, not altogether inappropriate, those
governments, the first to which the word democracy was applied, must be
considered entitled to the name; in the same manner as it is given to
the northern States of America, although women are there excluded from
the rights of citizenship; an exclusion which, equally with that of
slaves, militates against the democratic principle. The Athenian
Constitution was so far a democracy, that it was government by a
multitude, composed in majority of poor persons—small landed proprietors
and artisans. It had the additional democratic characteristic, far more
practically important than even the political franchise; it was a
government of boundless publicity and freedom of speech. It had the
liberty of the bema, of the dicastery, the portico, the palæstra, and
the stage; altogether a full equivalent for the liberty of the press.
Further, it was the only government of antiquity which possessed this
inestimable advantage in the same degree, or retained it as long.
Enemies and friends alike testify that the παῤῥησία of Athens was
paralleled in no other place in the known world. Every office and honour
was open to every citizen, not, as in the aristocratic Roman republic
(or even the British monarchy), almost nominally, but really: while the
daily working of Athenian institutions (by means of which every citizen
was accustomed to hear every sort of question, public and private,
discussed by the ablest men of the time, with the earnestness of purpose
and fulness of preparation belonging to actual business, deliberative or
judicial) formed a course of political education, the equivalent of
which modern nations have not known how to give even to those whom they
educate for statesmen. To their multitudinous judicial Edition: current;
Page: [325] tribunals the Athenians were also indebted for that habitual
love of fair play, and of hearing both sides of a case, which was more
or less a quality of the Greeks generally, but had so firm a hold on the
Athenians that it did not desert them under the most passionate
excitement. The potency of Grecian democracy in making every individual
in the multitude identify his feelings and interests with those of the
state, and regard its freedom and greatness as the first and principal
of his own personal concerns, cannot be better described than in the
words of Mr. Grote. After quoting a remarkable passage from Herodotus,
descriptive of the unexpected outburst of patriotic energy at Athens
after the expulsion of the Pisistratidæ and the establishment of the
Cleisthenean constitution,* Mr. Grote proceeds as follows.

Democracy in Grecian antiquity possessed the privilege, not only of
kindling an earnest and unanimous attachment to the constitution in the
bosoms of the citizens, but also of creating an energy of public and
private action such as could never be obtained under an oligarchy, where
the utmost that could be hoped for was a passive acquiescence and
obedience. Mr. Burke has remarked that the mass of the people are
generally very indifferent about theories of government: but such
indifference (although improvements in the practical working of all
governments tend to foster it) is hardly to be expected among any people
who exhibit decided mental activity and spirit on other matters; and the
reverse was unquestionably true, in the year 500 bc, among the
communities of ancient Greece. Theories of government were there
anything but a dead letter; they were connected with emotions of the
strongest as well as of the most opposite character. The theory of a
permanent ruling One, for example, was universally odious; that of a
ruling Few, though acquiesced in, was never positively attractive,
unless either where it was associated with the maintenance of peculiar
education and habits, as at Sparta, or where it presented itself as the
only antithesis to democracy, the latter having by peculiar
circumstances become an object of terror. But the theory of democracy
was pre-eminently seductive; creating in the mass of the citizens an
intense positive attachment, and disposing them to voluntary action and
suffering on its behalf, such as no coercion on the part of other
governments could extort. Herodotus, in his comparison of the three
sorts of government, puts in the front rank of the advantages of
democracy “its most splendid name and promise”—its power of enlisting
the hearts of the citizens in support of their constitution, and of
providing for all a common bond of union and fraternity.[*] This is what
even democracy did not always do: but it was what no other government in
Greece could do: a reason alone sufficient to stamp it as the best
government, and presenting the greatest chance of beneficent results. .
. . Among the Athenian citizens, certainly, it produced a strength and
unanimity of Edition: current; Page: [326] positive political sentiment,
such as has rarely been seen in the history of mankind; which excites
our surprise and admiration the more, when we compare it with the apathy
which had preceded, and which is even implied as the natural state of
the public mind in Solon’s famous proclamation against neutrality in a
sedition.[*] Because democracy happens to be unpalatable to most modern
readers, they have been accustomed to look upon the sentiment here
described only in its least honourable manifestations—in the caricatures
of Aristophanes, or in the empty commonplaces of rhetorical declaimers.
But it is not in this way that the force, the earnestness, or the
binding value of democratical sentiment at Athens is to be measured. We
must listen to it as it comes from the lips of Pericles, while he is
strenuously enforcing upon the people those active duties for which it
both implanted the stimulus and supplied the courage; or from the
oligarchical Nikias in the harbour of Syracuse, when he is endeavouring
to revive the courage of his despairing troops for one last
death-struggle, and when he appeals to their democratical patriotism as
to the only flame yet alive and burning even in that moment of agony.
From the time of Kleisthenes downward, the creation of this new mighty
impulse makes an entire revolution in the Athenian character; and if the
change still stood out in so prominent a manner before the eyes of
Herodotus, much more must it have been felt by the contemporaries among
whom it occurred.

(Vol. IV, pp. 237-9.)

The influences here spoken of were those of democracy generally. For the
peculiar and excellent organization of her own democracy, Athens was
indebted to a succession of eminent men. The earliest was her great
legislator, Solon; himself the first capital prize which Athens drew in
the dispensations of the Destinies; a man whose personal virtue ennobled
the cityxforx which he was chosen to legislate, and the merit of whose
institutions was a principal source of the deep-rooted respect for the
laws, which distinguished Athens beyond any other of the ancient
democracies. The salutary forms of business established by Solon, and
calculated to secure as much caution and deliberation asywerey
compatible with ultimate decision by a sovereign Ecclesia, lived through
the successive changes by which the Constitution was rendered more and
more democratic. And though it is commonly supposed that popular passion
in a democracy is peculiarly liable to trample on forms when they stand
between it and its object—which is indeed, without question, one of the
dangers of a democracy—there is no point in the character of the
Athenians more remarkable, than their respect and attachment to the
forms of their Constitution. In the height of their anger against
Pericles, for not leading them out to defend their lands and houses from
the ravages of the Peloponnesians—because he, standing on his privilege
as a magistrate, abstained from calling an assembly, no assembly met.
There is indeed but one marked instance known to us in Athenian history,
of that violation of forms which was the Edition: current; Page: [327]
daily practice of most of the oligarchical governments. That one was a
case of great and just provocation, the “cause célèbre” of the six
generals who neglected to save their drowning countrymen after the sea
fight of Arginusæ: and there was, as Mr. Grote has shown, no injustice
in the fact of their condemnation by the people, though there was a
blameable violation of the salutary rules of criminal procedure
established for the protection of the innocent. It was in this case that
the philosopher Socrates, accidentally that month a senator of the
presiding tribe, as firm against the “civium ardor prava jubentium” as
afterwards against the “vultus instantis tyranni,”[*] singly refused to
join in putting the question to the assembly contrary to the laws;
adding one to the proofs that the man of greatest intellect at that time
in Athens was also its most virtuous citizen.

After Solon (omitting the intervening usurpation of Pisistratus), the
first great constitutional change was the reformation of Cleisthenes, an
eminent man, to whose character and historical importance no one before
Mr. Grote had done justice. The next was that in which the immediate
mover was Aristides, at the re-establishment of the city after the
Persian war, when the poorest class of citizens was first admitted to
share in public employments. The final measures which completed the
democratic constitution were those of Pericles and Ephialtes; more
particularly the latter, a statesman of whom, from the unfortunate
absence of any cotemporary history of the period between the Persian and
Peloponnesian wars except the brief introductory sketch of
Thucydides,[†] we have to lament that too little is known, but of whom
the recorded anecdotes indicate a man worthy to have been the friend of
Pericles.* Ephialtes perished by assassination, a victim to the
rancorous hatred of the oligarchical party. Assassination afterwards
disappears from Athenian public life, until reintroduced on a regular
system by the same party, to effect the revolution of the Four Hundred.
The Athenian Many, of whose democratic irritability and suspicion we
hear so much, are rather to be accused of too easy and goodnatured a
confidence, when we reflect that they had living in the midst of them
the very men who, on the first show of an opportunity, were ready to
compass the subversion of the democracy by the dark deeds of Peisander
and Antiphon, and when they had effected their object, perpetrated all
the villanies of Critias and his associates.zThese menaought always to
be Edition: current; Page: [328] present to the mind, not merely asbab
dark background to the picture of the Athenian republic, but as an
active power in ita.zcTheyc were no obscure private individuals, but men
of rank and fortune, not only prominent as politicians and public
speakers, but continually trusted with all the great offices of state.
Truly Athens was in more danger from these men than from the demagogues:
they were indeed themselves the worst of the demagogues—described by
Phrynichus, their confederate, as, for their own purposes, the leaders
and instigators of the Demos to its most blameable actions, ποριστὰς καὶ
ἐσηγητὰς τω̑ν κακω̑ν τῳ̑ δήμῳ, ἐξ ὠ̑ν τὰ πλείω αὐτοὺς ὠϕελει̑σθαι.[*]

These are a few of the topics on which a flood of light is let in by Mr.
Grote’s History, and from which those who have not read it may form some
notion of the interest which pervades it, especially the part relating
to the important century between 500 and 400 bcd The searching character
of Mr. Grote’s historical criticism is not suspiciously confined to
matters in which his own political opinions may be supposed to be
interested. Though the statement has the air of an exaggeration, yet
after much study of Mr. Grote’s book we do not hesitate to assert, that
there is hardly a fact of importance in Grecian history which was
perfectly understood before his re-examination of it. This will not seem
incredible, to those who are aware how new an art that of writing
history is; how very recently it is that we possess histories, of events
not cotemporary with the writer, which, apart from literary merit, have
any value otherwise than as materials; how utterly uncritical, until
lately, were all historians, even as to the most important facts in
history, and how much, even after criticism had commenced, the later
writers merely continued to repeat after the earlier. In our own
generation, Niebuhr has effected a radical revolution in the opinions of
all educated persons respecting Roman history. Grecian events,
subsequent to the Homeric period, are more authentically recorded; but
there, too, a very moderate acquaintance with the evidence was
sufficient to show how superficially it had hitherto been examined.

eThat the Sophists, for example, were not the knaves and profligates
they are so often representedfto have beenf, could be gathered even from
the statements of the hostile witnesses on whose authority they were
condemned. The Protagoras alone, of their great enemy Plato, is a
Edition: current; Page: [329] sufficient document.gBut Mr. Grote has
been the first to point out clearly what the Sophists really were.hThat
term was the common designation for speculative inquirers generally, and
more particularly for instructors of youth; and was applied to Socrates
and Plato, as much as to those whom they confuted. The Sophists formed
no school, had no common doctrines, but speculated in the most
conflicting ways on physics and metaphysics; while with respect to
morals, those among them who professed to prepare young men for active
life, taught the current morality of the age in its best form: the
apologue of the Choice of Hercules was the composition of a Sophist.[*]
It is most unjust to the Sophists to adopt, as the verdict of history
upon them, the severe judgment of Plato, although from Plato’s point of
view they deserved it. He judged them from the superior elevation of a
great moral and social reformer: from that height he looked down
contemptuously enough, not on them alone, but on statesmen, orators,
artists—on the whole practical life of the period, and all its
institutions, popular, oligarchical, or despotic; demanding a
reconstitution of society from its foundations, and a complete
renovation of the human mind. One who had these high aspirations, had
naturally little esteem for men who did not see, or aspire to see,
beyond the common ideas of their age; but, as Mr. Grote remarks, to
accept his judgment of them would be like characterizing the teachers
and politicians of the present time in the words applied to them by Owen
or Fourier.[†] Even Plato, for the most part, puts the immoral doctrines
ascribed to the Sophists (such as the doctrine that might makes right)
into the mouths not of Sophists, but of ambitious active politicians,
like Callicles. The Sophists, in Plato, almost always express themselves
not only with decorum, but with good sense and feeling, on the subject
of social duties; thoughihis hero Socratesi always succeeds in puzzling
them, and displaying the confusion of their ideas, or rather of the
common ideas of mankind, of which they are the exponents.hg

jAgain, the Athenian democracy had been so outrageously, and without
measure, misrepresented, that whoever had read, as so few have done,
Thucydides and the orators with decent intelligence and candour, could
easily perceive that the vulgar representation was very wide of the
truth; just as any one who had read Livy could see, and many did see,
that the Agrarian law was not the unjust spoliation that was pretended:
but as it Edition: current; Page: [330] required Niebuhr to detect with
accuracy what the Agrarian law actually was,[*] so no less profound a
knowledge of Greek literature than that of Mr. Grote, combined with
equal powers of reasoning and reflection, would have sufficed to make
the effective working of the Athenian Constitution as well known to us
as it may now be pronounced to be. The mountain of error which had
accumulated and hardened over Greek history, the removal of which had
been meritoriously commenced by Dr. Thirlwall, has not only been shaken
off, but the outlines of the real object are now made visible. And so
cautious and sober is Mr. Grote in thekestimationk of evidence, so
constantly on his guard against letting his conclusions outrun his
proofs, as to make it a matter of wonder that among so much that is
irreparably lost, his researches have enabled him to arrive at so
considerable an amount of positive and certifiable result.

This conscientious scrupulousness in maintaining the demarcation between
conjecture and proof, is more indispensable than any other excellence in
a historian, and above all in one who sets aside the common notion of
many of the facts which he relates, and replaces it by a version of his
own. Without this quality, such an innovator on existing beliefs
inspires no reliance, and can only, at most, unsettle historical
opinion, without helping to restore it. Anybody can scrawl over the
canvas with the commonplaces of rhetoric or the catchwords of party
politics; and many, especially in Germany, can paint-in a picture from
the more or less ingenious suggestions of a learned imagination. But Mr.
Grote commands the confidence of the reader by his sobriety in
hypothesis, by never attempting to pass off an inference as a fact, and,
when he differs from the common opinion, explaining his reasons with the
precision and minuteness of one who neither desires nor expects that
anything will be taken upon trust. He has felt that a history of Greece,
to be of any value, must be also a running commentary on the evidence,
and he has endeavoured to put the reader in a position to judge for
himself on every disputable point. But the discussions, though to a
historical taste as interesting as the narrative, are not carried on at
its expense. Wherever the facts, authentically known, allow a
consecutive stream of narrative to be kept up, the story is told in a
more interesting manner than it has anywhere been told before, except in
the finest passages of Thucydides.

We are indeed disposed to assign to this history almost as high a rank
in narrative as in thought. It is open, no doubt, to minute criticism;
and many writers are superior to Mr. Grote in rapidity, grace, and
picturesqueness of style. But even in these respects there is no such
deficiency as amounts to a Edition: current; Page: [331] fault, while in
two qualities, far more important to the interest, not to say the value,
of his recitals, he has few equals and probably no superior. The first
is, that at each point in the series of events, he makes it his primary
object to fill his own mind and his reader’s with as correct and
complete a conception as can be formed of the situation; so that we
enter at once into the impressions and feelings of the actors, both
collective and individuall. Niebuhr had already, in his Lectures on
Ancient Historym,[*] carried his characteristic liveliness of conception
into the representation of the leading characters of Greek history,
depicting them, often we fear with insufficient warrant from evidence,
like persons with whom he had long lived and been familiar; but, for
clearness and correctness in conceiving the surrounding circumstances,
and the posture of affairs at each particular moment, we do not think
him at all comparable to Mr. Grote.

nOne of the beneficial fruits of this quality is, that it makes the
history a philosophic one without apparent effort. There is no need of
lengthened discussion to connect causes with their effects; the causes
and effects are parts of the same picture, and the causes are seen in
action before it appears what they are to produce. For example, the
reader whose mind is filled with the greatness attained by Athens while
her councils were ruled by the commanding intellect and self-restraining
prudence of Pericles, might almost anticipate the coming disasters when
he finds, in the early chapters of theoseventh volumeo, into the hands
of what advisers Athens had already fallen. And, mark well, these evil
advisers were not the demagogues, but the chiefs of the aristocracy, the
richest and most highborn men in the republic—Nicias and Alcibiades. Mr.
Grote had already shown grounds for believing that Cleon, and men of his
stamp, had been far too severely dealt with by historians; not that they
did not frequently deserve censure, but that they were by no means the
worst misleaders of the Athenian people. The demagogues were, as he
observes, essentially opposition speakers. The conduct of affairs was
habitually in the hands of the rich and great, who had by far the
largest share of personal influence, and on whose mismanagement there
would have been hardly any check, but for the demagogues and their
hostile criticism. These opinions receive ample confirmation from the
course of affairs, when, there being no longer any lowborn Cleon or
Hyperbolus to balance their influence, Nicias and Edition: current;
Page: [332] Alcibiades had full scope to ruin the commonwealth. The
contrary vices of these two men, both equally fatal, are exemplified in
the crowning act of their maladministration; the one having been the
principal adviser of the ill-starred expedition to Syracuse, while the
other was the main cause of its ruinous failure, by his intellectual and
moral incapacity.n

pThis genuine realization of the successive situations,qalsoq renders
the narrative itself a picture of the Greek mind. Carrying on,
throughout, the succession of feelings concurrently with that of events,
the writer becomes, as it were, himself a Greek, and takes the reader
along with him. And hence, if every discussion or dissertation in the
book were omitted, it would still be wonderfully in advance of any
former history in making the Greeks intelligible. For example, no modern
writer has made the reader enter into the religious feelings of the
Greeks as Mr. Grote does. Other historians let it be supposed that,
except in some special emergencies, beliefs and feelings relating to the
unknown world counted for very little among the determining causes of
events; and it is a kind of accredited opinion, that the religion of the
ancients sat almost as lightly on them, as if it had been to them, what
it is in modern literature, a mere poetical ornament. But the case was
quite otherwise: religion was one of the most active elements in Grecian
life, with an effect, in the early rude times, probably on the whole
beneficial, but growing more and more injurious as civilization
advanced. Mr. Grote is the first historian who has given an adequate
impression of the omnipresence of this element in Grecian life; the
incessant reference to supernatural hopes and fears which pervaded
public and private transactions, as well as the terrible power with
which those feelings were capable of acting, and not unfrequently did
act, on the Hellenic susceptibilities. While our admiration is thus
increased for the few superior minds who, like Pericles and Epaminondas,
rose above at least the vulgarer parts of the religion of their country,
or, like Plato, probably rejected it altogether, we are enabled to see
the explanation of much that would otherwise be enigmatical, and to
judge the Greeks with the same amount of allowance for errors produced
by their religion, which in parallel cases is always conceded to the
moderns.

The other eminent quality which distinguishes Mr. Grote’s narrative is
its pervading ἤθος; the moral interest, which is so much deeper and more
impressive than picturesque interest, and exists in portions of the
history which afford no materials for the latter. The events do not
always admit of being vividly depicted to the mental eye; and when they
do, the author does not always make use of the opportunity: but one
thing he never fails in—the moral aspect of the events and of the
persons is never out of sight, and gives Edition: current; Page: [333]
the predominating character to the recital. We use the word moral not
solely in the restricted sense of right and wrong, but as inclusive of
the whole of the sentiments connected with the occasion. Along with the
clear light of the scrutinizing intellect, there is the earnest feeling
of a sympathizing contemporary. This rich source of impressiveness in
narration is often wanting in writers of the liveliest fancy, and the
most brilliant faculty of delineating the mere outside of historical
factsr.

sNor is the narrative deficient in the commoner sources of interest. The
apt selection and artistic grouping of the details of battles and
sieges, Mr. Grote had found done to his hand by the consummate narrators
whom he follows, and in this respect he could do no better than simply
to reproduce their recital. There is much more that belongs peculiarly
to himself, in the series of remarkable characters whom he exhibits
before us, not so much (generally speaking) in description or analysis,
as in action. In the earlier period, the prominent characters are
Themistocles and Aristides: Themistocles, the most sagacious, the most
far-sighted, the most judiciously daring, the craftiest, and
unfortunately also one of the most unprincipled of politicians; who
first saved, then aggrandized, and at last would have sold his country:
Aristides, the personification of public and private integrity, the one
only Grecian statesman who finds grace before the somewhat pedantically
rigid tribunal of the Platonic Socrates.

tThet figure which most brightly illuminatesuthe middle periodu of Mr.
Grote’s history is Pericles—“the Thunderer”—“the Olympian Zeus,” as he
was called by his libellers, the comic dramatists of Athens.[*] Seldom,
if ever, has there been seen in a statesman of any age, such a
combination of great qualities as were united in this illustrious man:
unrivalled in eloquence; eminent in all the acquirements, talents, and
accomplishments of his country; the associate of all those among
hisvcotemporariesv who were above their age, either in positive
knowledge or in freedom from superstition; though an aristocrat by birth
and fortune, a thorough democrat in principle and conduct, yet never
stooping to even the pardonable arts of courting popularity, but
acquiring and maintaining his ascendancy solely by his commanding
qualities; never flattering his countrymen save on what Edition:
current; Page: [334] was really admirable in them, and which it was for
their good to be taught to cherish, but the determined enemy of their
faults and follies; ever ready to peril his popularity by giving
disagreeable advice, and when not appreciated, rising up against the
injustice done him with a scornful dignity almost amounting to defiance.
Such was Pericles: and that such a man should have been practically
first minister of Athens during the greatest part of a long political
life, is not so much honourable to him as to the imperial people who
were willing to be so led; who, though in fits of temporary irritation
and disappointment, excusable in the circumstances, they several times
withdrew their favour from him, always hastened to give it back; and
over whom, while he lived, no person of talents and virtues inferior to
his was able to obtain any mischievous degree of influence. It is
impossible to estimate how great a share this one man had in making the
Athenians what they werew. A great man had, in the unbounded publicity
of Athenian political life, extraordinary facilities for moulding his
country after his own image; and seldom has any people, during a whole
generation, enjoyed such a course of education, as forty years of
listening to the lofty spirit and practical wisdom of Pericles must have
been to the Athenian Demos.

As the next in this gallery of historical portraits, we quote the
character of another but a far inferior Athenian statesman, whom Mr.
Grote is, we think, the very first to appreciate correctly, and bring
before us in the colours and lineaments of life.x

Though Nikias, son of Nikeratus, had been for some time conspicuous in
public life, and is said to have been more than once Strategus along
with Pericles, this is the first occasion on which Thucydides introduces
him to our notice.[*] He was now one of the Strategi or generals of the
commonwealth, and appears to have enjoyed, on the whole, a greater and
more constant personal esteem than any citizen of Athens, from the
present time down to his death. In wealth and in family, he ranked among
the first class of Athenians: in political character, Aristotle placed
him, together with Thucydides son of Melesias, and Theramenes, above all
other names in Athenian history—seemingly even above Pericles. Such a
criticism from Aristotle deserves respectful attention, though the facts
before us completely belie so lofty an estimate. It marks, however, the
position occupied by Nikias in Athenian politics, as the principal
person of what may be called the oligarchical party, succeeding Kimon
and Thucydides, and preceding Theramenes. In looking to the conditions
under which this party continued to subsist, we shall see that during
the interval between Thucydides (son of Melesias) and Nikias, the
democratical forms had acquired such confirmed ascendancy, that it would
not have suited the purpose of any politician to betray evidence of
positive hostility to them, prior to the Sicilian expedition and the
great embarrassment in the foreign relations of Athens which Edition:
current; Page: [335] arose out of that disaster. After that change, the
Athenian oligarchs became emboldened and aggressive, so that we shall
find Theramenes among the chief conspirators in the revolution of the
Four Hundred: but Nikias represents the oligarchical party in its
previous state of quiescence and torpidity, accommodating itself to a
sovereign democracy, and existing in the form of common sentiment rather
than of common purposes. And it is a remarkable illustration of the real
temper of the Athenian people, that a man of this character, known as an
oligarch but not feared as such, and doing his duty sincerely to the
democracy, should have remained until his death the most esteemed and
influential man in the city. He was a man of a sort of even mediocrity,
in intellect, in education, and in oratory; forward in his military
duties, and not only personally courageous in the field, but also
competent as a general under ordinary circumstances: assiduous in the
discharge of all political duties at home, especially in the post of
Strategus or one of the ten generals of the state, to which he was
frequently chosen and rechosen. Of the many valuable qualities combined
in his predecessor Pericles, the recollection of whom was yet fresh in
the Athenian mind, Nikias possessed two, on which, most of all, his
influence rested—though, properly speaking, that influence belongs to
the sum total of his character, and not to any special attributes in it.
First, he was thoroughly incorruptible as to pecuniary gains—a quality
so rare in Grecian public men of all the cities, that when a man once
became notorious for possessing it, he acquired a greater degree of
trust than any superiority of intellect could have bestowed upon him:
next, he adopted the Periclean view as to the necessity of a
conservative or stationary foreign policy for Athens, and of avoiding
new acquisitions at a distance, adventurous risks, or provocation to
fresh enemies. With this important point of analogy, there were at the
same time material differences between them even in regard to foreign
policy. Pericles was a conservative, resolute against submitting to loss
or abstraction of empire, as well as refraining from aggrandizement.
Nikias was in policy faint-hearted, averse to energetic effort for any
purpose whatever, and disposed not only to maintain peace, but even to
purchase it by considerable sacrifices. Nevertheless, he was the leading
champion of the conservative party of his day, always powerful at
Athens: and as he was constantly familiar with the details and actual
course of public affairs, capable of giving full effect to the cautious
and prudential point of view, and enjoying unqualified credit for honest
purposes—his value as a permanent counsellor was steadily recognised,
even though in particular cases his counsel might not be followed.

Besides these two main points, which Nikias had in common with Pericles,
he was perfect in the use of those minor and collateral modes of
standing well with the people, which that great man had taken little
pains to practise. While Pericles attached himself to Aspasia, whose
splendid qualities did not redeem in the eyes of the public either her
foreign origin or her unchastity, the domestic habits of Nikias appear
to have been strictly conformable to the rules of Athenian decorum.
Pericles was surrounded by philosophers, Nikias by prophets—whose advice
was necessary both as a consolation to his temperament, and as a guide
to his intelligence under difficulties: one of them was constantly in
his service and confidence; and his conduct appears to have been
sensibly affected by the difference of character between one prophet and
another, just as the government of Louis XIV and other Catholic princes
has been modified by the change of confessors. To a life thus rigidly
decorous and ultra-religious—both eminently acceptable to the
Athenians—Nikias added the judicious employment of a large fortune with
a view to popularity. Those liturgies (or expensive public duties
undertaken by rich men each Edition: current; Page: [336] in his turn,
throughout other cities of Greece as well as in Athens) which fell to
his lot, were performed with such splendour, munificence, and good
taste, as to procure for him universal encomiums; and so much above his
predecessors as to be long remembered and extolled. Most of these
liturgies were connected with the religious service of the state; so
that Nikias, by his manner of performing them, displayed his zeal for
the honour of the gods, at the same time that he laid up for himself a
store of popularity. Moreover, the remarkable caution and timidity—not
before an enemy, but in reference to his own fellow-citizens—which
marked his character, rendered him pre-eminently scrupulous as to giving
offence or making personal enemies. While his demeanour towards the
poorer citizens generally was equal and conciliating, the presents which
he made were numerous, both to gain friends and to silence assailants.
We are not surprised to hear that various bullies, whom the comic
writers turn to scorn, made their profit out of this susceptibility: but
most assuredly, Nikias as a public man, though he might occasionally be
cheated out of money, was greatly assisted by the reputation which he
thus acquired.

[Vol. VI, pp. 385-90.]

We have the more willingly extracted this passage, because, like many
others in these volumes, it contains lessons applicable to other times
and circumstances than those of Greece; Nicias being a perfect type of
one large class of the favourites of public opinion, modern as well as
ancient. And the view here incidentally presented of some points in the
character and disposition of the Athenian Many, will afford to readers
who only know Athens and Greece through the medium of writers like
Mitford, some faint idea of how much they have to unlearn.s

With regard to style, in the ordinary sense, what is most noticeable in
Mr. Grote is, that his style always rises with his subject. The more
valuable the thought, or interesting the incident, the apter and more
forcible is the expression; as is generally the case with writers who
are thinking of their subject rather than of their literary reputation.
We can conscientiously say of him what, rightly understood, is the
highest praise which, on the score of mere composition, a writer in the
more intellectual departments of literature can desire or deserve; that
everything which he has to express, he is always able to express
adequately and worthily.y

Edition: current; Page: [337]

Edition: current; Page: [338] Edition: current; Page: [339]


BAIN’S PSYCHOLOGY
 1859

Edition: current; Page: [340]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Dissertations and Discussions, III (1867), 97-152, where the title is
footnoted: “Edinburgh Review, October 1859.—1. ‘The Senses and the
Intellect.’ By Alexander Bain, A.M. [London: Parker,] 1855. 2. ‘The
Emotions and the Will.’ By the same Author. [London: Parker,] 1859.”
Reprinted from the Edinburgh Review, CX (Oct., 1859), 287-321, where the
article (unsigned) is headed: “Art. I.—1. The Senses and the Intellect.
By Alexander Bain, A.M. London: [Parker,] 1855. 2. The Emotions and the
Will. By Alexander Bain, A.M., Examiner in Logic and Moral Philosophy in
the University of London. London: [Parker,] 1859”; the running heads are
“Bain’s Psychology.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A review of
Bain’s two treatises on the Mind, in the Edinburgh Review for October
1859” (MacMinn, 92). An unsigned offprint of the article in the
Somerville College Library, paged 1-35, titled “Bain’s Psychology,” with
“[From the Edinburgh Review of October 1859]” printed under the title,
has no corrections or alterations in the text; the bibliographic
information in the headings is slightly expanded.

In the footnoted variants, “59” indicates Edinburgh Review (not, as is
normally the case, D&D, 1st ed., because this article appeared after the
publication of that edition); “67” indicates D&D, III (1st ed., 1867,
the copy-text). For comment on the composition of the essay and related
matters, see the Introduction and the Textual Introduction, lviii-lxvii
and lxxxix-xc above.

Edition: current; Page: [341]


Bain’s Psychology

the sceptre of psychology has decidedly returned to this island. The
scientific study of mind, which for two generations, in many other
respects distinguished for intellectual activity, had, while brilliantly
cultivated elsewhere, been neglected by our countrymen, is now nowhere
prosecuted with so much vigour and success as in Great Britain. Nor are
the achievements of our thinkers in this obstinately-contested portion
of the field of thought, merely one-sided and sectarian triumphs. The
two conflicting schools, or modes of thought, which have divided
metaphysicians from the very beginning of speculation—the à posteriori
and à priori schools, or, as they are popularly rather than accurately
designated, the Aristotelian and the Platonic—are both flourishing in
this country; and we venture to affirm that the best extant examples of
both have been produced within a recent period by Englishmen, or (it
should, perhaps, rather be said) by Scotchmen.

Of these two varieties of psychological speculation, the à posteriori
mode, or that which resolves the whole contents of the mind into
experience, is the one which belongs most emphatically to Great Britain,
as might be expected from the country which gave birth to Bacon. The
foundation of the à posteriori psychology was laid by Hobbes (to be
followed by the masterly developments of Locke and Hartley), at the very
time when Descartes, on the other side of the Channel, was creating the
rival philosophical system; for the French, who are so often
ill-naturedly charged with having invented nothing, at least invented
German philosophy. But after having initiated this mode of metaphysical
investigation, they left it to the systematic German thinkers to be
followed up; themselves descending to the rank of disciples and
commentators, first on Locke, and more recently on Kant and Schelling.
In England, the philosophy of Locke reigned supreme, until a Scotchman,
Hume, while making some capital improvements in its theory, carried out
one line of its apparent consequences to the extreme which always
provokes a reaction; and of this reaction, another Scotchman, Reid, was
the originator, and, with his eminent pupil, Stewart, also a Scotchman,
introduced as much of the à priori philosophy as could in any way be
made reconcilable with Baconian principles. These were succeeded by Dr.
Thomas Brown (still a Scotchman), Edition: current; Page: [342] who drew
largely and not unskilfully from both sources, though, for want of a
patience and perseverance on a level with his great powers, he failed to
effect a synthesis, and only produced an eclecticism. Meanwhile, the
more elaborate form of the à priori philosophy which the whole
speculative energy of Germany had been employed in building up, and
which the French had expounded with all the lucidity which it admitted
of, was in time studied also among us; and, according to what now seems
to be the opinion of the most competent judges, this philosophy has
found in a Scotchman, Sir William Hamilton, its best and profoundest
representative. But the great European philosophical reaction, was to
have its counterreaction, which has now reached a great height in
Germany itself, and is taking place here also; and of this, too, in our
island, the principal organs have been Scotchmen. Mr. James Mill, in his
Analysis of the Human Mind,[*] followed up the deepest vein of the
Lockian philosophy, that which was opened by Hartley, to still greater
depths: and now, in the work at the head of this article (we say work,
not works, for the second volume, though bearing a different title, is
in every sense a continuation of the first), a new aspirant to
philosophical eminence, Mr. Alexander Bain, has stepped beyond all his
predecessors, and has produced an exposition of the mind, of the school
of Locke and Hartley, equally remarkable in what it has successfully
done, and in what it has wisely refrained from—an exposition which
deserves to take rank as the foremost of its class, and as marking the
most advanced point which the à posteriori psychology has reached.*

We have no intention to profess ourselves partisans of either of these
schools of philosophy. Both have done great things for mankind. No one
whose studies have not extended to both, can be considered in any way
competent to deal with the great questions of philosophy in their
present state. And though one of the two must be fundamentally the
superior, there can be no doubt that, whichever this is, it has been
greatly benefited by the searching criticisms which it has sustained
from the other. But as the Lockian, or à posteriori, psychology has for
some time been under a cloud Edition: current; Page: [343] throughout
Europe, from which it is now decidedly emerging, and giving signs that
it is likely soon again to have its turn of ascendency, there may be use
in making some observations on the general pretensions of this
philosophy, its method, and the evidence on which it relies, and in
helping to make generally known a work which is the most careful, the
most complete, and the most genuinely scientific analytical exposition
of the human mind which the à posteriori psychology has up to this time
produced.

In these remarks no complete comparison between the two modes of
philosophizing is to be looked for. Psychology, with which we are here
concerned, is but the first stage in this great controversy—the arena of
the initial conflict. The account which the two schools respectively
render of the human mind is the foundation of their doctrines; but the
crowning peculiarity of each resides in the superstructure. That the
constitution of the mind is the key to the constitution of external
nature—that the laws of the human intellect have a necessary
correspondence with the objective laws of the universe, such that these
may be inferred from those—is the grand doctrine which the one school
affirms and the other denies; and the difference between this doctrine
and its negation, is the great practical distinction between the two
philosophies. But this question is beyond the compass of psychology. The
à priori philosophers, when they inculcate this doctrine, do so not as
psychologists, but as ontologists; and some distinguished thinkers, who,
so far as psychology is concerned, belong essentially to the à priori
school, have not thought it necessary to enter, except to a very limited
extent, on the ground of ontology. Among these may be counted Reid and
Stewart, as well as other more recent names of eminence. Indeed, the
grand pretension of the à priori school in its extreme development, that
of arriving at a knowledge of the Absolute, has received its most
elaborate and crushing refutation from two philosophers of that same
school—Sir William Hamilton and Mr. Ferrier: the à posteriori
metaphysicians having in general thought that the essential relativity
of our knowledge could dispense with direct proof, and might be left to
rest on the general evidence of their analysis of the mental phenomena.
Yet the philosophers whom we have named are not the less, up to a
certain point, ontologists. They all hold, that some knowledge, more or
less, of objective existences and their laws, is attainable by man, and
that it is obtained by way of inference from the constitution of the
human mind. Reid, for example, is decidedly of opinion that Matter—not
the set of phenomena so called, but the actual Thing, of which these are
effects and manifestations—is cognizable by us as a reality in the
universe; and that extension, solidity, and other fundamental attributes
of visible and tangible Nature, known to us by experience, are really
and unequivocally qualities inherent Edition: current; Page: [344] in
this actual thing; the evidence of which doctrine is, that we have,
ineradicable from our minds, conceptions or perceptions of these various
objects of thought, of which conceptions or perceptions the existence is
inexplicable, save from the reality of the things which they
represent.[*] Thus far Reid: who is therefore in principle as much an
ontologist as Hegel, though he does not lay claim to as minute a
knowledge of the constitution of “Things in themselves.” On the
legitimacy of this mode of reasoning, the other school is at issue with
them. The possibility of ontology is one of the points in dispute
between the two. It is one into which we do not here enter.

On the ground of simple psychology, the distinction between the two
philosophies consists in the different theories they give of the more
complex phenomena of the human mind. When we call the one philosophy à
priori, the other à posteriori, or of experience, the terms must not be
misunderstood. It is not meant that experience belongs only to one, and
is appealed to as evidence by one and not by the other. Both depend on
experience for their materials. Both require as the basis of their
systems, that the actual facts of the human mind should be ascertained
by observation. It is true they differ to some extent in their notion of
facts; the à priori philosophers cataloguing some things as facts, which
the others contend are inferences. The fundamental difference relates,
however, not to the facts themselves, but to their origin. Speaking
briefly and loosely, we may say that the one theory considers the more
complex phenomena of the mind to be products of experience, the other
believes them to be original. In more precise language, the à priori
thinkers hold, that in every act of thought, down to the most
elementary, there is an ingredient which is not given to the mind, but
contributed by the mind in virtue of its inherent powers. The simplest
phenomenon of all, an external sensation, requires, according to them, a
mental element to become a perception, and be thus converted from a
passive and merely fugitive state of our own being, into the recognition
of a durable object external to the mind. The notions of Extension,
Solidity, Number, Magnitude, Force, though it is through our senses that
we acquire them, are not copies of any impressions on our senses, but
creations of the mind’s own laws set in action by our sensations; and
the properties of these ideal creations are not proved by experience,
but deduced à priori from the ideas themselves, constituting the
demonstrative sciences of arithmetic, algebra, geometry, statics, and
dynamics. Experience, instead of being the source and prototype of our
ideas, is itself a product of the mind’s own forces working on the
impressions we receive from without, and has always a mental as well as
an Edition: current; Page: [345] external element. Experience is only
rendered possible by those mental laws which it is vainly invoked to
explain and account for. A fortiori do all our ideas of supersensual
things, and all our moral and spiritual judgments and perceptions,
proceed from our inherent mental constitution. Experience is the
occasion, not the prototype, of our mental ideas, and is neither the
source nor the evidence of our knowledge, but its test; for as what we
call experience is the outward manifestation of laws which are not to be
found in experience, but which may be known à priori, and as the effects
cannot be in contradiction to the cause, it is a necessary condition of
our knowledge that experience shall not conflict with it.

We are now touching the real point of separation between the à priori
and the à posteriori psychologists. These last also for the most part
acknowledge the existence of a mental element in our ideas. They admit
that the notions of Extension, Solidity, Time, Space, Duty, Virtue, are
not exact copies of any impressions on our senses. They grant them to be
ideas constructed by the mind itself, the materials alone being supplied
to it. But they do not think that this ideal construction takes place by
peculiar and inscrutable laws of the mind, of which no further account
can be given. They think that a further account can be given. They admit
the mental element as a fact, but not as an ultimate fact. They think it
may be resolved into simpler laws and more general facts; that the
process by which the mind constructs these great ideas may be traced,
and shown to be but a more recondite case of the operation of well-known
and familiar principles.

From this opinion, which ascribes an ascertainable genesis to that part
of the more complex mental phenomena which derives its origin from the
mind itself, instead of regarding it, with the à priori psychologists,
as something ultimate and inscrutable, there arises necessarily a wide
difference between the two as to what are called by the à priori
philosophers necessary elements of thought. M. Cousin, one of the
ablest, and (Fichte excepted) quite the most eloquent teacher of the à
priori school, deems it the radical error of Locke and his followers to
have raised the question of the origin of our ideas at the opening of
the inquiry, without first making a complete descriptive survey of the
ideas themselves; which if they had done, he thinks they must have
recognised, as involved in all our thoughts, certain necessary
assumptions, inconsistent with the origin which Locke ascribes to
them.[*] The difference, however, between the two theories, is not as to
the fact that these assumptions are made, but as to their being
necessary assumptions. The Lockians think they are able to show how and
why the mind is led to make these assumptions. They believe that it is
not Edition: current; Page: [346] obliged by any necessity of its nature
to make them. They think that the cause of our making the assumptions
lies in the conditions of our experience; that those conditions are
often accidental and modifiable, and might be so modified that we should
no longer be led to make these assumptions; and even when the
assumptions depend upon conditions of our experience which do not, so
far as our faculties can judge, admit of actual modification, yet if by
an exercise of thought we imagine them modified, the supposed necessity
of the assumptions will disappear. For example: the transcendentalist
examines our ideas of Space and Time, and finds that each of them
contains inseparably within itself the idea of Infinity. We can of
course have no experimental evidence of infinity: all our experiences,
and therefore, in his opinion, all our ideas derived from experience,
are of things finite. Yet to conceive Time or Space otherwise than as
things infinite is impossible. The infinity of Space and Time he
therefore sets down as a necessary assumption: and if his philosophy
leads him (which Kant’s did not) to regard Space and Time as having any
existence at all external to the mind, he proceeds, as an ontologist, to
infer from the necessity of the assumption, the infinity of the things
themselves. The à posteriori psychologist, on his part, also perceives
that we cannot think of Space or of Time otherwise than as infinite; but
he does not consider this as an ultimate fact, or as requiring any
peculiar law of mind or properties of the objects for its explanation.
He sees in it an ordinary manifestation of one of the laws of the
association of ideas,—the law, that the idea of a thing irresistibly
suggests the idea of any other thing which has been often experienced in
close conjunction with it, and not otherwise. As we have never had
experience of any point of space without other points beyond it, nor of
any point of time without others following it, the law ofainseparablea
association makes it impossible for us to think of any point of space or
time, however distant, without having the idea irresistibly realized in
imagination, of other points still more remote. And thus the supposed
original and inherent property of these two ideas is completely
explained and accounted for by the law of association; and we are
enabled to see, that if Space or Time were really susceptible of
termination, we should be just as unable as we now are to conceive the
idea. This being once seen, although the mental element, Infinity, still
remains attached to the ideas, we are no longer prompted to make a
“necessary assumption” of a corresponding objective fact. We are enabled
to acknowledge our ignorance, and our inability to judge whether the
course of Things, in this respect, corresponds with our necessities of
Thought. Space or Time may, for aught we know, be inherently terminable,
though in our present condition we are totally incapable Edition:
current; Page: [347] of conceiving a termination to them. Could we
arrive at the end of space, we should, no doubt, be apprised of it by
some new and strange impression upon our senses, of which it is not at
present in our power to form the faintest idea. But under all other
circumstances the association is indissoluble, since every moment’s
experience is constantly renewing it.

In this example, which is the more significant as the case is generally
considered one of the main strongholds of the à priori school, the two
leading doctrines of the most advanced à posteriori psychology are very
clearly brought to view: first, that the more recondite phenomena of the
mind are formed out of the more simple and elementary; and, secondly,
that the mental law, by means of which this formation takes place, is
the Law of Association. Though not the first who pointed out this law,
Locke was the author of its first great application to the explanation
of the mental phenomena, by his doctrine of Complex Ideas. The idea of
an orange, for example, is compounded of certain simple ideas of colour,
of visible and tangible shape, of taste, of smell, of a certain
consistence, weight, internal structure, and so forth: yetbourb idea of
an orange is to our feelings and conceptions one single idea, not a
plurality of ideas; thus showing that when any number of sensations have
been often experienced simultaneously or in very rapid succession, the
ideas of those sensations not only raise up one another, but do this so
certainly and instantaneously as to run together, and seem melted into
one. In this example, however, the original elements may still, by an
ordinary effort of consciousness, be distinguished in the compound. It
was reserved for Hartley to show that mental phenomena, joined together
by association, may form a still more intimate, and as it were chemical
union—may merge into a compound, in which the separate elements are no
more distinguishable as such, than hydrogen and oxygen in water; the
compound having all the appearance of a phenomenon sui generis, as
simple and elementary as the ingredients, and with properties different
from any of them: a truth which, once ascertained, evidently opens a new
and wider range of possibilities for the generation of mental phenomena
by means of association.

The most complete and scientific form of the à posteriori psychology, is
that which considers the law of association as the governing principle,
by means of which the more complex and recondite mental phenomena shape
themselves, or are shaped, out of the simpler mental elements. The great
problem of this form of psychology is to ascertain, not how far this law
extends, for it extends to everything; ideas of sensation, intellectual
ideas, emotions, desires, volitions, any or all of these may become
connected by association under the two laws of Contiguity and
Resemblance, and when Edition: current; Page: [348] so connected,
acquire the power of calling up one another. Not, therefore, how far the
law extends, is the problem, but how much of the apparent variety of the
mental phenomena it is capable of explaining; what ultimate elements of
the mind remain, when all are subtracted, the formation of which can be
in this way accounted for; and how, out of those elements, and the law,
or rather laws, of association, the remainder of the mental phenomena
are built up. On this part of the subject there are, as might be
expected, many differences of doctrine; and the theory, like all
theories of an uncompleted science, is in a state of progressive
improvement.

This mode of interpreting the phenomena of the mind is not unfrequently
stigmatised as materialistic; how far justly, may be seen when it is
remembered that the Idealism of Berkeley is one of the developments of
this theory. With materialism in the obnoxious sense, this view of the
mind has no necessary connexion, though doubtless not so directly
exclusive of it as is the rival theory. But if it be materialism to
endeavour to ascertain the material conditions of our mental operations,
all theories of the mind which have any pretension to comprehensiveness
must be materialistic. Whether organisation alone could produce life and
thought, we probably shall never certainly know, unless we could repeat
Frankenstein’s experiment;[*] but that our mental operations have
material conditions, can be denied by no one who acknowledges, what all
now admit, that the mind employs the brain as its material organ. And
this being granted, there is nothing more materialistic in endeavouring,
so far as our means of physiological explanation allow, to trace out the
detailed connexions between mental manifestations and cerebral or
nervous states. Unhappily, the knowledge hitherto obtainable on this
subject has been very limited in amount; but when we consider, for
example, the case of all our stronger emotions, and the disturbance of
almost every part of our physical frame, which is occasioned in these
cases by a mere mental idea, no rational person can doubt the closeness
of the connexion between the functions of the nervous system and the
phenomena of mind, norccanc think any exposition of the mind
satisfactory, into which that connexion does not enter as a prominent
feature.

It is undoubtedly true that the Association Psychology doesdrepresent
many ofd the higher mental states as in a certain sense the outgrowth
and offspring of the lower. But in other cases, philosophers have not
considered as degrading, the formation of noble products out of base
materials, and have rather been disposed to celebrate this, as one of
the exemplifications Edition: current; Page: [349] of wisdom and
contrivance in the arrangements of Nature. Without undertaking to
determine what portion of truth lies in this philosophy, and how far any
of the nobler phenomena of mind are really constructed from the
materials of our animal nature, it is certain that, to whatever extent
this is the fact, it ought to be known and recognised. If these nobler
parts of our nature are not self-sown and original, but are built or
build themselves up, out of no matter what materials, it must be highly
important to the work of the education and improvement of human
character, to understand as much as possible of the process by which the
materials are put together. These composite parts of our constitution
(granting them to be such) are not for that reason factitious and
unnatural. The products are not less a part of human nature than their
component elements. Water is as truly one of the substances in external
nature, as hydrogen or oxygen; and to suppose it non-existent would
imply as great a change in all we know of the order of things in which
we live. It is only to a very vulgar type of mind, that a grand or
beautiful object loses its charm when it loses some of its mystery,
through the unveiling of a part of the process by which it is created in
the secret recesses of Nature.

The aim, then, which the Association Psychology proposes to itself, is
one which both schools of mental philosophy should equally desire to see
vigorously prosecuted. It is important, even from the point of view of
transcendentalists, that all which can be done by this system for the
explanation of the mental phenomena should be brought to light. For, in
the first place, all admit that there is much which can be so explained.
The law of association, every one allows, is real, and a large number of
mental facts are explicable thereby. But further, the sole ground upon
which the transcendental mode of speculation in psychology can possibly
stand, is the failure of the other. The evidence of the à priori theory
must always be negative. There can be no positive proof that oxygen, or
any other body, is a simple substance. The sole proof that can be given
is, that no one has hitherto succeeded in decomposing it. And nothing
can positively prove that any particular one of the constituents of the
mind is ultimate. We can only presume it to be such, from the ill
success of every attempt to resolve it into simpler elements. If,
indeed, the phenomena alleged to be complex manifested themselves
chronologically at an earlier period than those from which they are said
to be compounded, this would be a complete disproof, at least of that
origin. But the fact is not so: on the contrary, the higher mental
phenomena are so well known to unfold themselves after the lower, that
sensational experience, which is so violently repudiated as their origin
and source, is, from the necessity of the case, admitted as the occasion
which calls into action the mental laws that develop them. The first
question, therefore, in analytical psychology ought to be, how much of
the Edition: current; Page: [350] furniture of the mind will experience
and association account for? The residuum which cannot be so explained,
must be provisionally set down as ultimate, and handed over to
observation to determine its conditions and laws.

On the other hand, it is necessary to be exigeant as to the evidence for
the validity of the analysis by which a mental phenomenon is resolved
into association. Much has been tendered on this subject, even by
powerful thinkers, as proved truth, to which it is impossible soberly to
assign any higher value than that of philosophical conjecture. The rules
of inductive logic must be duly applied to the case. When the elements
can be recognised by our consciousness as distinguishably existing in
the compound, there is no difficulty. When they are not thus
distinguishable, the gradual growth and building up of the complex
phenomenon may be a fact amenable to direct observation. In the case of
the higher intellectual and moral phenomena of our being, the
observation may be practised on ourselves. In the case of those of our
acquisitions which are made too early to be remembered, the observation
may be of children, of the young of other animals, or of persons who
are, or were during a part of life, shut out from some of the ordinary
sources of experience; persons like Caspar Hauser, brought up in
confinement and solitude; persons destitute of sight or hearing;
especially those born blind and suddenly restored to sight. This last is
a precious source of information, which unfortunately has been very
scantily made use of. In the case of children and young animals, our
power is very limited of ascertaining what actually passes within them.
But in so far as we are able to interpret their outward manifestations,
we have some means of ascertaining what, in their minds, precedesewhat.
Wee can often, by sufficiently close observation, perceive a mental
faculty forming itself by gradual growth; and in some cases we can, to a
certain extent, ascertain the conditions of its formation, which are
often such as to bring it within the known laws of association. Though
the product may, to our consciousness, appear sui generis, not identical
in its nature with any or with all of the elements, yet if the mode of
its production be invariably found to consist in bringing certain
sensations or ideas to pass through the mind simultaneously, or in
immediate succession, and if the effect is produced pari passu with the
number of repetitions of this conjunction, we may conclude with
considerable assurance that the apparently simple phenomenon is a
compound of those ideas, united by association. For we know that it is
the effect of repetition to knit all conjunctions of ideas closer and
closer, until they so coalesce as to leave no trace in our consciousness
of their separate existence. One of the most familiar cases of this
remarkable Edition: current; Page: [351] law, is the case of what are
called the acquired perceptions of sight. It is admitted by nearly all
psychologists, that when we appear to see distance and magnitude by the
eye, we do not really see them, but see only certain signs, from which,
by a process of reasoning, rendered so rapid by practice as to have
become entirely unconscious, we infer the distance or magnitude which we
fancy we see. No alleged transformation of mental phenomena by
association can be more complete, or more extraordinary, than this. Yet
it is one of the few results of psychological analysis which can be
brought to the test of a complete Baconian induction: for the case
admits of an ample range of experiments; and the result of them is, that
wherever the signs are the same, our impressions of distance and
magnitude are the same, and wherever the signs are different, our
impressions are different, although the real distance and magnitude of
the object looked at remain all the while exactly as they were. Hardly
any theory of the formation of a mental phenomenon by association can
deserve, after this, to be rejected in limine, for inherent
incredibility, or inconsistency with our consciousness. There is hardly
any mental phenomenon (except those which association itself
presupposes) of which we can say that, from its own nature, it could not
possibly have been produced by association. But, from the intrinsic
possibility of its having been so produced, to its actually being so, is
a wide step; and unless the case admits of actual experiment, or unless
there be something in the observed development of the individual mind to
bear out the conjecture, it can be ranked only as an hypothesis, of no
present value except to suggest points for further verification.

There is, however, a large class of cases—and these are among the most
important of all—in which the explanation by way of association is not
attended with any of these difficulties and uncertainties. The mental
fact which is the subject of dispute may be, not any one mental
phenomenon, but a conjunction between phenomena. The thing to be
explained often is no other than the fact that some one idea is
suggested by, and apparently involved in, another; and the point to be
decided is, whether this happens necessarily, and by an inherent law; as
infinity is said to be inherently involved in our ideas of time and
space, and externality in our ideas of tangible objects. In such cases
the evidence of origin in association may often be complete; and it is
in such that the greatest triumphs of the Association Psychology have
been achieved. A conjunction, however close and apparently indissoluble,
between two ideas, is not only an effect which association is able to
produce, but one which it is certain to produce, if the necessary
conditions are sufficiently often repeated without the intervention of
any fact tending to produce a counter-association. It is, therefore, in
these cases, sufficient if we can show, that there has really existed
the invariable conjunction of sensible phenomena in experience, Edition:
current; Page: [352] which is necessary for the formation of an
inseparable association between the corresponding ideas. If, as in the
case of Time and Space, already examined, this can be shown to be the
fact, then that conjunction of sensible experiences is the real cause:
formation by association is the true theory of the phenomenon, and it is
in the highest degree unphilosophical to demand any other.

These few observations on the nature and scope of the Association
Psychology generally, were necessary for fixing the position of Mr.
Bain’s treatise in mental science. Belonging essentially to the
association school, he has not only, with great clearness and
copiousness, illustrated, popularised, and enforced by fresh arguments,
all which that school had already done towards the explanation of the
phenomena of mind, but he has added so largely to it, that those who
have the highest appreciation and the warmest admiration of his
predecessors, are likely to be the most struck with the great advance
which this treatise constitutes over what those predecessors had done,
and the improved position in which it places their psychological theory.
Mr. Bain possesses, indeed, an union of qualifications peculiarly
fitting him for what, in the language of Dr. Brown, may be called the
physical investigation of mind.[*] With analytic powers comparable to
those of his most distinguished predecessors, he combines a range of
appropriate knowledge still wider than theirs; having made a more
accurate study than perhaps any previous psychologist, of the whole
round of the physical sciences, on which the mental depend both for
their methods, and for the necessary material substratum of their
theories: while those sciences, also, are themselves in a far higher
state of advancement than in any former age. This is especially true of
the science most nearly allied, both in subject and method, with
psychological investigations, the science of Physiology: which Hartley,
Brown, and Mill had unquestionably studied, and knew perhaps as well as
it was known by any one at the time when they studied it, but in a
superficial manner compared with Mr. Bain; the science having in the
meanwhile assumed almost a new aspect, from the important discoveries
which had been made in all its branches, and especially in the functions
of the nervous system, since even the latest of those authors wrote.

Mr. Bain commences his work with a full and luminous exposition of what
is known of the structure and functions of the nervous system. What may
be called the outward action of the nervous system is twofold,—sensation
and muscular motion; and one of the great physiological discoveries of
the present age is, that these two functions are performed by Edition:
current; Page: [353] means of two distinct sets of nerves, in close
juxtaposition; one of which, if separately severed or paralysed, puts an
end to sensation in the part of the body which it supplies, but leaves
the power of motion unimpaired; the other destroys the power of motion,
but does not affect sensation. That the central organ of the nervous
system, the brain, must in some way or other co-operate in all
sensation, and in all muscular motion except that which is actually
automatic and mechanical, is also certain; for if the nervous continuity
between any part of the body and the brain is interrupted, either by the
division of the nerve, or by pressure on any intermediate portion,
unfitting it to perform its functions, sensation and voluntary motion in
that part cease to exist. That the memory or thought of a sensation
formerly experienced has also for its necessary condition a state of the
brain, and of the same nerves which transmit the sensation itself, does
not admit of the same direct proof by experiment; but is, at least, a
highly probable hypothesis. When we consider that in dreams,
hallucinations, and some highly excited states of the nervous system,
the idea or remembrance of a sensation is actually mistaken for the
sensation itself; and also that the idea, when vividly excited, not
unfrequently produces the same effects on the whole bodily frame which
the sensation would produce, it is hardly possible, in the face of all
this resemblance, to suppose any fundamentally different machinery for
their production, or any real difference in their physical conditions,
except one of degree. The instrumentality of the brain in thought is a
more mysterious subject; the evidence is less direct, and its
interpretation has given rise to some of the keenest controversies of
our era, controversies yet far from being conclusively decided. But the
general connexion is attested by many indisputable pathological facts:
such as the effect of cerebral inflammation in producing delirium; the
relation between idiocy and cerebral malformation or disease; and is
confirmed by the entire range of comparative anatomy, which shows the
intellectual faculties of the various species of animals bearing, if not
an exact ratio, yet a very unequivocal relation, to the development in
proportional size, and complexity of structure, of the cerebral
hemispheres.

However imperfect our knowledge may still be in regard to this part of
the functions of the nervous system, it is certain that all our
sensations depend upon the transmission of some sort of nervous
influence inward, from the senses to the brain, and that our voluntary
motions take place by the transmission of some sort of nervous influence
outward, from the brain to the muscular system; these two nervous
operations being, as already observed, the functions of two distinct
systems of nerves, called respectively the nerves of sensation and those
of motion. It is now necessary to notice another physiological truth,
brought to light only within the present generation, viz. the different
functions of the two kinds of matter of which Edition: current; Page:
[354] the nervous system is compounded. The nerves consist partly of
grey vesicular or cell-like matter, partly of white fibrous matter.
Physiologists are now of opinion that the function of the grewy matter
is that of originating power, while the white fibrous matter is simply a
conductor, which conveys the influence to and from the brain, and
between one part of the brain and another. With this physiological
discovery is connected the first capital improvement which Mr. Bain has
made in the Association Psychology as left by his predecessors; the
nature of which we now proceed to indicate.

Those who have studied the writings of the Association Psychologists,
must often have been unfavourably impressed by the almost total absence,
in their analytical expositions, of the recognition of any active
element, or spontaneity, in the mind itself. Sensation, and the memory
of sensation, are passive phenomena; the mind, in them, does not act,
but is acted upon; it is a mere recipient of impressions; and though
adhesion by association may enable one of these passive impressions to
recall another, yet when recalled, it is but passive still. A theory of
association which stops here, seems adequate to account for our dreams,
our reveries, our casual thoughts, and states of mere contemplation, but
for no other part of our nature. The mind, however, is active as well as
passive; and the apparent insufficiency of the theory to account for the
mind’s activity, is probably the circumstance which has oftenest
operated to alienate from the Association Psychology any of those who
had really studied it. Coleridge, who was one of these, and in the early
part of his life a decided Hartleian, has left on record, in his
Biographia Literaria, that such was the fact in his own case.[*] Yet, no
Hartleian could overlook the necessity, incumbent on any theory of the
mind, of accounting for our voluntary powers. Activity cannot possibly
be generated from passive elements; a primitive active element must be
found somewhere; and Hartley found it in the stimulative power of
sensation over the muscles. All our muscular motions, according to him,
were originally automatic, and excited by the stimulus of sensations;
as, no doubt, many of them were and are. After a muscular contraction
has been sufficiently often excited by a sensation, then, in Hartley’s
opinion, the idea or remembrance of the sensation acquires a similar
power of exciting that same muscular contraction. Here is the first germ
of volition: a muscular action excited by an idea. After this, every
combination of associated ideas into which that idea or remembrance
enters, and which, therefore, cannot be recalled without recalling it,
obtains the power of recalling also the muscular motion which has come
under its control. This is Hartley’s notion of the point of junction
between our intellectual states and our muscular actions, which is
Edition: current; Page: [355] the foundation of the theory of Volition.
It involves two assumptions, both of which are merely hypothetical. One
is, that all muscular action is originally excited by sensations; which
has never been proved, and which there is much evidence to contradict.
The other is, that between the primitive automatic character of a
muscular contraction, and its ultimate state of amenability to the will,
an intermediate condition is passed through, of excitability by the idea
of the sensation by which the motion was at first excited: that the
intervention of this idea is necessary in all cases of voluntary power;
and that the recalling of it is the indispensable machinery of voluntary
action. This is a mere hypothesis, which consciousness does not vouch
for, and which no evidence has been brought to substantiate.

Mr. Bain has made a great advance on this theory. Those who are
acquainted with the French metaphysical writers of this century, or even
with the first paper of M. Cousin’s Fragments Philosophiques,[*] will
remember the important modification made by M. Laromiguière in
Condillac’s psychological system. M. Laromiguière had noted in Condillac
the same defect which has been pointed out in the Association
philosophers; and as Condillac had placed the passive phenomenon,
Sensation, at the centre of his system, M. Laromiguière corrected him by
putting instead of it the active phenomenon, Attention, as the
fundamental fact by which to explain the active half of the mental
phenomena.[†] Mr. Bain’s theory (the germ of which is in a passage cited
by him from the eminent physiologist, Müller),[‡] stands in nearly the
same relation to Hartley’s as Laromiguière’s to that of Condillac. He
has widened his basis by the admission of a second primitive element. He
holds that the brain does not act solely in obedience to impulses, but
is also a self-acting instrument; that the nervous influence which,
being conveyed through the motory nerves, excites the muscles into
action, is generated automatically in the brain itself, not, of course,
lawlessly and without a cause, but under the organic stimulus of
nutrition; and manifests itself in the general rush of bodily activity,
which all healthy animals exhibit after food and repose, and in the
random motions which we see constantly made without apparent end or
purpose by infants. This doctrine, of which the accumulated proofs will
be found in Mr. Bain’s first volume (The Senses and the Intellect, pp.
73-80), supplies him with a simple explanation of the origin of
voluntary power. Among the numerous Edition: current; Page: [356]
motions given forth indiscriminately by the spontaneous energy of the
nervous centre, some are accidentally hit on, which are found to be
followed by a pleasure, or by the relief of a pain. In this case, the
child is able, to a certain extent, to prolong that particular motion,
or to abate it; and this, in our author’s opinion, is the sole original
power which we possess over our bodily motions, and the ultimate basis
of voluntary action. The pleasure which the motion produces, or the pain
which it relieves, determines the detention or relinquishment of that
particular muscular movement. Why there is this natural tendency to
detain or to get rid of a muscular contraction which influences our
sensations, as well as why that tendency is towards pleasure and from
pain, instead of being the reverse, cannot be explained. The author’s
reason for considering this to be our only original power over our
bodily movements, is not that the supposition affords any help in
clearing up the mystery, or possesses any superiority of antecedent
probability; for it is just as likely à priori that we should be able,
by a wish, to select and originate a bodily movement, as that we should
merely be able to prolong one which has already been excited by the
spontaneous energies of our organisation. Mr. Bain’s reason for
preferring the latter theory, is merely that the evidence is in its
favour; that no other is consistent with observation of children and
young animals. We will exhibit a part of the exposition in his own
words.

Dr. Reid has no hesitation in classing the voluntary command of an
organ, that is, the sequence of feeling and action implied in all acts
of will, among instincts.[*] The power of lifting a morsel of food to
the mouth is, according to him, an instinctive or pre-established
conjunction of the wish and the deed; that is to say, the emotional
state of hunger coupled with the sight of a piece of bread, is
associated through a primitive link of the mental constitution with the
several movements of the hand, arm, and mouth concerned in the act of
eating. This assertion of Dr. Reid’s may be simply met by appealing to
the facts. It is not true that human beings possess at birth any
voluntary command of their limbs whatsoever. A babe of two months old
cannot use its hands in obedience to its desires. The infant can grasp
nothing, hold nothing, can scarcely fix its eyes on anything. Dr. Reid
might just as easily assert that the movements of a ballet-dancer are
instinctive, or that we are born with an already established link of
causation in our minds between the wish to paint a landscape and the
movements of a painter’s arm. If the more perfect command of our
voluntary movements implied in every art be an acquisition, so is the
less perfect command of these movements, that grows upon a child during
the first years of life. . . .

But the acquisition must needs repose upon some fundamental property of
our nature that may properly be styled an instinct. It is this initial
germ or rudiment that I am now anxious to fasten upon and make apparent.
There certainly does exist in the depths of our constitution a property,
whereby certain of our feelings, especially Edition: current; Page:
[357] the painful class, impel to action of some kind or other. This,
which I have termed the volitional property of feeling, is not an
acquired property. From the earliest infancy a pain has a tendency to
excite the active organs, as well as the emotional expression, although
as yet there is no channel prepared whereby the stimulus may flow
towards the appropriate members. The child whose foot is pricked by a
needle in its dress is undoubtedly impelled by an active stimulus, but
as no primitive link exists between an irritation in the foot and the
movement of the hand towards the part affected, the stimulus is wasted
on vain efforts, and there is nothing to be done but to drown the pain
by the outburst of pure emotion. It is the property of almost every
feeling of pain to stimulate some action for the extinction or abatement
of that pain; it is likewise the property of many emotions of pleasure
to stimulate an action for the continuance and increase of the pleasure;
but the primitive impulse does not in either case determine which action
. . . .

If at the moment of some acute pain, there should accidentally occur a
spontaneous movement, and if that movement sensibly alleviates the pain,
then it is that the volitional impulse belonging to the feeling will
show itself. The movement accidentally begun through some other
influence, will be sustained through this influence of the painful
emotion. In the original situation of things, the acute feeling is
unable of itself to bring on the precise movement that would modify the
suffering; there is no primordial link between a state of suffering and
a train of alleviating movements. But should the proper movement be once
actually begun, and cause a felt diminution of the acute agony, the spur
that belongs to states of pain would suffice to sustain this movement. .
. . The emotion cannot invite, or suggest, or waken up the appropriate
action; nevertheless, the appropriate action, once there, and sensibly
telling upon the irritation, is thereupon kept going by the active
influence, the volitional spur of the irritated consciousness. In short,
if the state of pain cannot awaken a dormant action, a present feeling
can at least maintain a present action. This, so far as I can make out,
is the original position of things in the matter of volition. It may be
that the start and the movements resulting from an acute smart, may
relieve the smart, but that would not be a volition. In volition there
are actions quite distinct from the manifested movements due to the
emotion itself; these other actions rise at first independently and
spontaneously, and are clutched in the embrace of the feeling when the
two are found to suit one another in the alleviation of pain or the
effusion of pleasure.

An example will perhaps place this speculation in a clearer light. An
infant lying in bed has the painful sensation of chillness. This feeling
produces the usual emotional display—namely, movements, and perhaps
cries and tears. Besides these emotional elements there is a latent spur
of volition, but with nothing to lay hold of as yet, owing to the
disconnected condition of the mental arrangements at our birth. The
child’s spontaneity, however, may be awake, and the pained condition
will act so as to irritate the spontaneous centres, and make their
central stimulus flow more copiously. In the course of a variety of
spontaneous movements of arms, legs, and body, there occurs an action
that brings the child in contact with the nurse lying beside it;
instantly warmth is felt, and this alleviation of the painful feeling
becomes immediately the stimulus to sustain the movement going on at
that moment. That movement, when discovered, is kept up in preference to
the others occurring in the course of the random spontaneity. . . .

By a process of cohesion or acquisition, coming under the law of
association, the movement and the feeling become so linked together,
that the feeling can at after times waken the movement out of dormancy;
this is the state of matters in the Edition: current; Page: [358]
maturity of volition. The infant of twelve months, under the stimulus of
cold, can hitch nearer the side of the nurse, although no spontaneous
movements to that effect happen at the moment; past repetition has
established a connexion that did not exist at the beginning, whereby the
feeling and action have become linked together as cause and effect.

(The Senses and the Intellect, pp. 292-6.)

In confirmation and illustration of thesef remarks, we quote from
another part of the same volume the following “notes of observation made
upon the earliest movements of two lambs seen during the first hour of
their birth, and at subsequent stages of their development.”

One of the lambs, on being dropped, was taken hold of by the shepherd
and laid on the ground so as to rest on its four knees. For a very short
time, perhaps not much above a minute, it kept still in this attitude; a
certain force was doubtless exerted to enable it to retain this
position; but the first decided exertion of the creature’s own energy
was shown in standing up on its legs, which it did after the pause of
little more than a minute. The power thus put forth I can only describe
as a spontaneous burst of the locomotive energy, under this
condition—namely, that as all the four limbs were actuated at the same
instant, the innate power must have been guided into this quadruple
channel in consequence of that nervous organisation that constitutes the
four limbs one related group. The animal now stood on its legs, the feet
being considerably apart, so as to widen the base of support. The energy
that raised it up continued flowing in order to maintain the standing
posture, and the animal doubtless had the consciousness of such a flow
of energy, as its earliest mental experience. This standing posture was
continued for a minute or two in perfect stillness. Next followed the
beginnings of locomotive movement. At first a limb was raised and set
down again, then came a second movement that widened the animal’s base
without altering its position. When a more complex movement of its limbs
came on, the effect seemed to be to go sideways; another complex
movement led forwards; but at the outset there appeared to be nothing to
decide one direction rather than another, for the earliest movements
were a jumble of side, forward, and backward. Still, the alternation of
limb that any consecutive advance required, seemed within the power of
the creature during the first ten minutes of life. Sensation as yet
could be of very little avail, and it was evident that action took the
start in the animal’s history. The eyes were wide open, and light must
needs have entered to stimulate the brain. The contact with the solid
earth, and the feelings of weight and movement, were the earliest
feelings. In this state of uncertain wandering with little change of
place, the lamb was seized hold of and carried up to the side of the
mother. This made no difference till its nose was brought into contact
with the woolly skin of the dam, which originated a new sensation. Then
came a conjunction manifestly of the volitional kind. There was clearly
a tendency to sustain this contact, to keep the nose rubbing upon the
side and belly of the ewe. Finding a certain movement to have this
effect, that movement was sustained; exemplifying what I considered the
primitive or fundamental fact of volition. Losing the contact, there was
yet no power to recover it by a direct action, for the indications of
sight at this stage had no meaning. The animal’s spontaneous irregular
movements were continued; for a time they were quite fruitless, until a
chance Edition: current; Page: [359] contact came about again, and this
contact could evidently sustain the posture or movement that was causing
it. The whole of the first hour was spent in these various movements
about the mother, there being in that short time an evident increase of
facility in the various acts of locomotion, and in commanding the head
in such a way as to keep up the agreeable touch. A second hour was spent
much in the same manner, and in the course of the third hour the animal,
which had been entirely left to itself, came upon the teat, and got this
into its mouth. The spontaneous workings of the mouth now yielded a new
sensation, whereby they were animated and sustained, and unexpectedly
the creature found itself in the possession of a new pleasure; the
satisfaction first of mouthing the object—next, by-and-by, the pleasure
of drawing milk; the intensity of this last feeling would doubtless give
an intense spur to the coexisting movements, and keep them energetically
at work. A new and grand impression was thus produced, remaining after
the fact, and stimulating exertion and pursuit in order to recover it.

Six or seven hours after birth the animal had made notable progress, and
locomotion was easy, the forward movement being preferred but not
predominant. The sensations of sight began to have a meaning. In less
than twenty-four hours the animal could, at the sight of the mother
ahead, move in the forward direction at once to come up to her, showing
that a particular visible image had now been associated with a definite
movement; the absence of any such association being most manifest in the
early movements of life. It could proceed at once to the teat and suck,
guided only by its desire and the sight of the object. It was now in the
full exercise of the locomotive faculty; and very soon we could see it
moving with the nose along the ground in contact with the grass, the
preliminary of seizing the blades in the mouth. . . .

The observations proved distinctly three several points—namely, first
the existence of spontaneous action as the earliest fact in the
creature’s history; second, the absence of any definite bent prior to
experienced sensation; and third, the power of a sensation actually
experienced to keep up the coinciding movement of the time, thereby
constituting a voluntary act in the initial form. What was also very
remarkable, was the rate of acquisition, or the rapidity with which all
the associations between sensations and actions became fixed. A power
that the creature did not at all possess naturally, got itself matured
as an acquisition in a few hours; before the end of a week the lamb was
capable of almost anything belonging to its sphere of existence; and at
the lapse of a fortnight, no difference could be seen between it and the
aged members of the flock.

(Pp. 404n-406n.)

The larger half of Mr. Bain’s first volume is occupied by the exposition
of Association. His exemplification and illustration of this fundamental
phenomenon of mind, in its two varieties—adhesive association by
contiguity in time or place, and suggestion by resemblance—are quite
unexampled in richness, clearness, and comprehensiveness. The whole of
the intellectual phenomena, as distinguished from the emotional, he
considers as explicable by that law. But to render this possible, the
law must be conceived in its utmost generality. Association is not
between ideas of sensation alone. The following is the author’s
statement of the two laws of association, the law of Contiguity, and
that of Similarity:

Edition: current; Page: [360]
Actions, sensations, and states of feeling, occurring together or in
close succession, tend to grow together or cohere in such a way that
when any one of them is afterwards presented to the mind, the others are
apt to be brought up in idea. (P. 318.)

Present actions, sensations, thoughts, or emotions, tend to revive their
like among previous impressions.

(P. 451.)

One of the leading features in Mr. Bain’s application of these laws to
the analysis of phenomena, is the great use he makes of the muscular
sensations, in explaining our impressions of, and judgments respecting,
things physically external to us. The distinction between these
sensations and those of touch, in the legitimate sense of the word, and
the prominent part they take in the composition of our ideas of
resistance or solidity, and extension, were first pointed out by
Brown,[*] and were the principal addition which he made to the
analytical exposition of the mind. Mr. Bain carries out the idea to a
still greater length, and his developments of it are highly instructive,
though he sometimes, perhaps, insists too much upon it, to the prejudice
of other elements equally or more influential. Thus, in his explanation
of the acquired perception of distance and magnitude by sight, he lays
almost exclusive stress on the sensations accompanying the muscular
movements by which the eyes are adapted to different distances from us,
or are made to pass along the lengths and breadths of visible objects.
That this is one of the sources of the acquired perceptions of sight,
cannot be doubted; but that it is the principal one, no one will
believe, who considers that all the impression of unequal distances from
us that a picture can give, is produced not only without this particular
indication, but in contradiction to it. The signs by which we mainly
judge are the effects of perspective, both linear and aerial; in other
words, the differences in the actual picture made on the retina: the
imitation of which constitutes the illusion of the painter’s art, and
which we should have been glad to see illustrated by Mr. Bain, as he is
so well able to do, instead of being merely acknowledged by a quotation
in a note (pp. 380n-382n). We regret that our limits forbid us to quote
(pp. 372-6) his explanation of the mode whereby, in his opinion, the
feeling of resistance, a result of our muscular sensations, generates
the notion, often supposed to be instinctive, of an external world.

Respecting the law of Association by Contiguity, so much had been done,
with such eminent ability, by former writers, that this part of Mr.
Bain’s exposition is chiefly original in the profuseness and minuteness
of his illustrations. To bring up the theory of the law of Similarity to
the same level, much more remained to do, that law having been rather
unaccountably Edition: current; Page: [361] sacrificed to the other by
some of the Association psychologists; among whom Mr. James Mill, in his
Analysis, even endeavoured to resolve it into contiguity;[*] an attempt
which is perhaps the most inconclusive part of that generally acute and
penetrating performance, association by resemblance being, as Mr. Bain
observes, presupposed by, and indispensable to the conception of,
association by contiguity. The two kinds of association are indeed so
different, that the predominance of each gives rise to a different type
of intellectual character; an eminent degree of the former constituting
the inductive philosopher, the poet and artist, and the inventor and
originator generally; while adhesive association gives memory,
mechanical skill, facility of acquisition in science or business, and
practical talent so far as unconnected with invention.

To the long chapters on Contiguity and Similarity, Mr. Bain subjoins a
third on what he terms Compound Association; “where several threads, or
a plurality of links or bonds of connexion, concur in reviving some
previous thought or mental state” (ibid., p. 544); which they
consequently recall more vividly: a part of the subject too little
illustrated by former writers, and which includes, among many others,
the important heads of “the singling out of one among many trains,” [p.
562,] and what our author aptly terms “obstructive association.” [P.
564.] The subject is concluded by a chapter on “Constructive
Association,” analysing the process by which the mind forms
“combinations or aggregates different from any that have been presented
to it in the course of experience,” and showing this to depend on the
same laws [p. 571]. We are unable to find room for the smallest specimen
of these chapters, which are marked with our author’s usual ability, and
fill up what is partially a hiatus in most treatises on Association.

Mr. Bain’s exposition of the Emotions is not of so analytical a
character as that of the intellectual phenomena. He considers it
necessary, in this department, to allow a much greater range to the
instinctive portion of our nature; and has exhibited what may be termed
the natural history of the emotions, rather than attempted to construct
their philosophy. It is certain that the attempts of the Association
psychologists to resolve the emotions by association, have been on the
whole the least successful part of their efforts. One fatal imperfection
is obvious at first sight: the only part of the phenomenon which their
theory explains, is the suggestion of an idea or ideas, either
pleasurable or painful—that is, the merely intellectual part of the
emotion; while there is evidently in all our emotions an animal part,
over and above any which naturally attends on the ideas considered
separately, and which these philosophers have passed without any attempt
at explanation. It is a wholly insufficient account of Fear, for
example, to Edition: current; Page: [362] resolve it into the calling
up, by association, of the idea of the dreaded evil; since, were this
all, the physical manifestations that would follow would be the same in
kind, and mostly less in degree, than those which the evil would itself
produce if actually experienced; whereas, in truth, they are generically
distinct; the screams, groans, contortions, &c., which (for example)
intense bodily suffering produces, being altogether different phenomena
from the well-known physical effects and manifestations of the passion
of terror. It is conceivable that a scientific theory of Fear may one
day be constructed, but it must evidently be the work of physiologists,
not of metaphysicians. The proper office of the law of association in
connexion with it, is to account for the transfer of the passion to
objects which do not naturally excite it. We all know how easily any
object may be rendered dreadful by association, as exemplified by the
tremendous effect of nurses’ stories in generating artificial terrors.

We must not, therefore, expect to find in the half volume which Mr. Bain
has dedicated to this subject, any attempt at a general analysis of the
emotions. He has not even (except in one important case, to which we
shall presently advert) entered, with the fulness which belongs to his
plan, and which marks the execution of every other part of it, into the
important inquiry, how far some emotions are compounded out of others.
He gives a general indication of his opinion on the point; but his
illustrations of it are scattered, and mostly incidental. He has,
however, written the natural history of the emotions with great
felicity, in a manner at once scientific and popular; insomuch that this
part of his work presents attractions even to the unscientific reader.
Mr. Bain’s classification of the emotions is different from, and more
comprehensive than, any other which we have met with. He begins with
“the feelings connected with the free vent of emotion in general, and
with the opposite case of restrained or obstructed outburst;”[*] the
feelings, in short, of liberty or restraint in the utterance of emotion;
which he regards as themselves emotions, and entitled, on account of
their superior generality, to be placed at the head of the catalogue. He
next proceeds to one of the simplest as well as most universal of our
emotions—Wonder. The third on his list is Terror. The fourth is “the
extensive group of feelings implied under the title of the Tender
Affections.”[†] The consideration of these feelings is by most writers
blended with that of Sympathy; which is carefully distinguished from
them by our author, and treated separately, not as an emotion, but as
the capacity of taking on the emotions, or mental states generally, of
others. A character may possess tenderness without being at all
sympathetic, as is the case with Edition: current; Page: [363] many
selfish sentimentalists; and the converse, though not equally common, is
equally in human nature. From these he passes to a group which he
designates by the title, Emotions of Self: including Self-esteem, or
Self-complacency, in its various forms of Conceit, Pride, Vanity, &c.,
which he regards as cases of the emotions of tenderness directed towards
self, and has largely illustrated this view of them. The sixth class is
the emotions connected with Power. The seventh is the Irascible
Emotions. The eighth is a group not hitherto brought forward into
sufficient prominence, the emotions connected with Action. “Besides the
pleasures and pains of Exercise, and the gratification of succeeding in
an end, with the opposite mortification of missing what is laboured for,
there is in the attitude of pursuit, a peculiar state of mind, so far
agreeable in itself, that factitious occupations are instituted to bring
it into play. When I use the term plot-interest, the character of the
situation alluded to will be suggested with tolerable distinctness.”[*]
This grouping together of the emotions of hunting, of games, of intrigue
of all sorts, and of novel-reading, with those of an active career in
life, seems to us equally original and philosophical. The ninth class
consists of the emotions caused by the operations of the Intellect. The
tenth is the group of feelings connected with the Beautiful. Eleventh
and last, comes the Moral Sense.

Of these, the four first are regarded by Mr. Bain as original elements
of our nature, having their root in the constitution of the nervous
system, and not explicable psychologically. The remaining seven he
considers as generated by association from these four, with the aid of
certain combinations of circumstances. Though, as already remarked, he
does not discuss this question in the express and systematic manner
which his general scheme would appear to require, he has said many
things which throw a valuable light on it, together with some which we
consider questionable. But we still desiderate an analytical philosophy
of the emotional, like that which he has furnished of the intellectual,
part of our constitution. Much of the material is ready to his hand, and
only requires co-ordination under the universal law of mind which he has
so well expounded. For example, the most complicated of all his eleven
classes, the æsthetic group of emotions, has been analysed to within a
single step of the ultimate principle, by thinkers who did not see, and
would not have accepted, the one step which remained. Mr. Ruskin would
probably be much astonished were he to find himself held up as one of
the principal apostles of the Association Philosophy in Art. Yet, in one
of the most remarkable of his writings, the second volume of Modern
Painters, he aims at establishing, by a large induction and a searching
analysis, that all things are beautiful (or sublime) Edition: current;
Page: [364] which powerfully recall, and none but those which recall,
one or more of a certain series of elevating or delightful thoughts.[*]
It is true that in this coincidence Mr. Ruskin does not recognise
causation, but regards it as a pre-established harmony, ordained by the
Creator, between our feelings of the Beautiful and certain grand or
lovely ideas. Others, however, will be inclined to see in this
phenomenon, not an arbitrary dispensation of Providence, which might
have been other than it is, but a case of the mental chemistry so often
spoken of; and will think it more in accordance with sound methods of
philosophizing to believe, that the great ideas so well recognised by
Mr. Ruskin, when they have sunk sufficiently deep into our nervous
sensibility, actually generate, by composition with one another and with
other elements, the æsthetic feelings which so nicely correspond to
them.

The last of our author’s eleven classes, that of Moral Emotion, is the
only one on which, in relation to the problem of its composition, he
puts forth his whole strength. The question whether the moral feelings
are intuitive or acquired—a point so often and so warmly contested
between the rival schools of Psychology—has never before, we think, been
so well or so fully argued on the anti-intuitive side. This masterly
chapter would serve better than any other to give a correct idea of Mr.
Bain’s philosophical capacity and turn of mind; but, unfortunately,
either extracts or an abridgment would do it injustice, as they would
impair the argument by mutilating it. Mr. Bain’s theory is, that the
moral emotions are of an extremely complicated character; a compound,
into which the social affections, and sympathy (which is a different
thing from the social affections), enter largely, as well as, in many
cases, the almost equally common fact of disinterested antipathy. But
the peculiar feeling of obligation included in the moral sentiment, Mr.
Bain regards as wholly created by external authority. He considers this
character as impressed upon the feeling entirely by the idea of
punishment. The purely disinterested character which the feeling assumes
after appropriate cultivation, he holds to be one of the numerous
instances of a feeling transferred by association to objects not
containing in themselves that which originally excited it. This general
conception of the origin of the moral sentiment is nothing new; but
there is considerable novelty, as well as ability, in the mode in which
it is worked out: and without, on the present occasion, expressing any
opinion on this vexata quæstio, we can safely recommend Mr. Bain’s
dissertation to the special study of those who wish to know the theory
entertained on this subject by the Association school, and the best
which they have to say in its support.

Edition: current; Page: [365]
From the Emotions, Mr. Bain proceeds to the Will; and if, on the former
subject, the reader who has previously gone through Mr. Bain’s first
volume finds less of psychological analysis than he probably expected,
such a complaint will not be made on the topic which succeeds. By no
previous psychologist has the Volitional part of our nature been gone
into with such minute detail, and the whole of the phenomena connected
with it set forth and analysed with such fulness and such grasp of the
subject. We have already stated the view taken by our author of the
origin, or first germ, of our voluntary powers, which he conceives to be
grounded, first, on “the existence of a spontaneous tendency to execute
movements independent of the stimulus of sensations or feelings;”[*]
and, secondly, of a power to detain and prolong, or to abate and
discontinue, a present movement, under the stimulus of a present
pleasure or pain. If this be correct, the original power of the will
over our muscles is much the same in extent, as it is and always remains
over our thoughts and feelings; for over them, the only direct power we
have is that of detaining them before the mind, or (it would perhaps be
more correct to say) of producing any number of immediate mental
repetitions of them, which is the meaning of what we call Attention.
Through ten successive chapters Mr. Bain expands and applies this idea,
showing how, in his belief, all the phenomena of volition are erected by
Association on this original basis. The titles of some of the chapters
and sections will show the comprehensiveness of the scheme:—The
Spontaneity of Movement; Link of Feeling and Action; Growth of Voluntary
Power; Control of Feelings and Thoughts; Motives or Ends; the Conflict
of Motives; Deliberation, Resolution, Effort; Desire; the Moral Habits;
Prudence, Duty, Moral Inability. It is only in the eleventh chapter,
after the analysis of the phenomena is completed, that the author
encounters the question which usually, in the writings of
metaphysicians, usurps nearly all the space devoted to the phenomena of
Will: we need hardly say that we refer to the Free-Will controversy. Mr.
Bain is of opinion that the terms Freedom and Necessity are both equally
inappropriate, equally calculated to give a false view of the phenomena.
He thinks the word Necessity “nothing short of an incumbrance” in the
sciences generally.[†] But he adheres, in an unqualified manner, to the
universality of the law of Cause and Effect, or the uniformity of
sequence in natural phenomena, to which he does not think that the
determinations of the will are in any manner an exception. He holds that
men’s volitions and voluntary actions might be as certainly predicted,
by any one who was aware of the state of the psychological agencies
operating in the case, as any class of physical Edition: current; Page:
[366] phenomena may be predicted from causes in operation. We quote, not
as the best passage, but as the one which best admits of extraction, a
portion of the controversial part of this chapter, being that in which
the author examines the appeal made to consciousness as an infallible
criterion in all psychological difficulties:

A bold appeal is made by some writers to our consciousness, as
testifying in a manner not to be disputed the liberty of the will.
Consciousness, it is said, is our ultimate and infallible criterion of
truth. To affirm it erring, or mendacious, would be to destroy the very
possibility of certain knowledge, and even to impugn the character of
the Deity. Now this infallible witness, we are told, attests that man is
free, wherefore the thing must be so. The respectability and number of
those that have made use of this argument compel me to examine it. I
confess that I find no cogency in it. As usual, there is a double sense
in the principal term, giving origin to a potent fallacy. . . . For the
purpose now in view, the word [consciousness] implies the knowledge that
we have of the successive phases of our own mind. We feel, think, and
act, and know that we do so; we can remember a whole train of mental
phenomena mixed up of these various elements. The order of succession of
our feelings, thoughts, and actions is a part of our information
respecting ourselves, and we can possess a larger or a smaller amount of
such information, and, as is the case with other matters, we may have it
in a very loose or in a very strict and accurate shape. The mass of
people are exceedingly careless about the study of mental co-existences
and successions; the laws of mind are not understood by them with
anything like accuracy. Consciousness, in this sense, resembles
observation as regards the world. By means of the senses, we take in,
and store up, impressions of natural objects,—stars, mountains, rivers,
plants, animals, cities, and the works and ways of human beings,—and
according to our opportunities, ability, and disposition, we have in our
memory a greater or less number of those impressions, and in greater or
less precision. Clearly, however, there is no infallibility in what we
know by either of these modes, by consciousness as regards thoughts and
feelings, or by observation as regards external nature; on the contrary,
there is a very large amount of fallibility, fallacy, and falsehood in
both the one and the other. Discrepancy between the observations of
different men upon the same matter of fact, is a frequent circumstance,
the rule rather than the exception. . . . If such be the case with the
objects of the external senses, what reason is there to suppose that the
cognizance of the mental operations should have a special and
exceptional accuracy? Is it true that this cognizance has the
definiteness belonging to the property of extension in the outer world?
Very far from it; the discrepancy of different men’s renderings of the
human mind is so pronounced, that we cannot attribute it to the
difference of the thing looked at, we must refer it to the imperfection
in the manner of taking cognizance. If there were any infallible
introspective faculty of consciousness, we ought at least to have had
some one region of mental facts where all men were perfectly agreed. The
region so favoured must of necessity be the part of mind that could not
belong to metaphysics; there being nothing from the beginning to
controvert or to look at in two ways, there could be no scope for
metaphysical disquisition. The existence of metaphysics, as an
embarrassing study, or field of inquiry, is incompatible with an
unerring consciousness.

(The Emotions and the Will, pp. 555-7.)

Mr. Bain then proceeds to show, but at too much length for quotation,
Edition: current; Page: [367] that the only fact testified to by any
person’s consciousness is an instantaneous fact—“the state of his or her
own feelings at any one moment:”[*] that when the person proceeds to
speak of a past, and merely remembered feeling, fallibility begins: that
when he speaks of sequences, and the law of a feeling, even in himself,
much more in mankind generally, he transcends the dominion of
consciousness altogether, and enters on that of observation, which,
whether introspective or external, is subject to a thousand errors. Now
the free-will question is emphatically one ofglawg, and can be
determined only by deep philosophizing, not by a brief appeal to the
fancies of an individual concerning himself. A man’s consciousness can
no more inform him what laws his volitions secretly obey, than his
senses, when he beholds falling bodies, furnish him with the
corresponding information respecting the law of gravitation.

The work concludes with two chapters on special subjects, the one on
Belief, the other on Consciousness; subjects discussed separately, and
in the last stage of the exposition, in consequence of the peculiar view
taken of them by Mr. Bain, which differs from that of all previous
metaphysicians.

Belief is, of all the phenomena usually classed as intellectual, that
which the Association psychologists have hitherto been the least
successful in analysing; though it has given occasion to some able and
highly instructive illustrations, by Mr. James Mill and Mr. Herbert
Spencer, of the power of indissoluble association.[†] But the opinion
which these authors have advanced, that belief is nothing but an
indissoluble association between two ideas, seems an inadequate solution
of the problem; because, in the first place, if the fact were so, belief
itself must always be indissoluble; which, evidently, it is not; and, in
the second place, one does not see what, on this theory, is the
difference between believing the affirmative and the negative of a
proposition, since in either case (if the theory be true), the idea
expressed by the subject of the proposition must inseparably and
irresistibly recall the idea expressed by the predicate. The doctrine of
these philosophers would have been irrefragable, had they limited it to
affirming that an indissoluble association (or let us rather say, an
association for the present irresistible), usually commands belief; that
when such an association exists between two ideas, the mind, especially
if destitute of scientific culture, has great difficulty in not
believing that there is a constancy of connexion between the
corresponding phenomena, considered as facts in Edition: current; Page:
[368] nature. But, even in the strongest cases of this description, a
mind exercised in abstract speculation can reject the belief, though
unable to get over the association. A Berkeleian, for example, does not
believe in the real existence of matter, though the idea is excited in
his mind by his muscular sensations as irresistibly as in other people.

Mr. Bain’s opinion is, that the difficulty experienced by the
Association psychologists in giving an account of Belief, and the
insufficient analysis with which they have contented themselves, arise
from their looking at Belief too exclusively as an intellectual
phenomenon, and disregarding the existence in it of an active element.
His doctrine is, that Belief has no meaning, except in reference to our
actions; that the distinctive characteristic of Belief is that it
commands our will.

An intellectual notion or conception is indispensable to the act of
believing; but no mere conception that does not directly or indirectly
implicate our voluntary exertions, can ever amount to the state in
question. (Ibid., p. 568.)

The primordial form of belief is expectation of some contingent future,
about to follow on an action. Wherever any creature is found performing
an action, indifferent in itself, with a view to some end, and adhering
to that action with the same energy that would be manifested under the
actual fruition of the end, we say that the animal possesses confidence,
or belief, in the sequence of two different things, or in a certain
arrangement of nature, whereby one phenomenon succeeds to another. The
glistening surface of a pool or rivulet, appearing to the eye, can give
no satisfaction to the agonies of thirst; but such is the firm connexion
established in the mind of man and beast between the two properties of
the same object, that the appearance to the eye fires the energies of
pursuit no less strongly than the actual contact with the alimentary
surface. An alliance so formed is a genuine example of the condition of
belief.

(Ibid., pp. 569-70.)

No one will dispute that “the genuineness of the state of belief is
tested by the control of the actions” (pp. 570-1). If we really believe
a statement, we are willing to commit ourselves in conduct, on the
prospect of finding the result accord with our belief. And there is no
doubt that it is this command over the actions, which gives all its
importance to that particular state of mind, and leads to its being
named and classed separately. Yet the question remains, what is that
state of mind? The action which follows is not the belief itself, but a
consequence of the belief. Where there is an effect to be accounted for,
there must be something in the cause to account for it. Since the
willingness to commit ourselves in conduct occurs in some cases, and
does not occur in others, there must be some difference between the
former set of cases and the latter, as regards the antecedent phenomena.
What is this difference? According to Mr. Bain, it does not lie in the
strength of the tie of association between the ideas of the facts
conceived.

I can imagine the mind receiving an impression of co-existence or
sequence, such as the coincidence of relish with an apple, or other
object of food; and this Edition: current; Page: [369] impression
repeated until, on the principle of association, the one shall, without
fail, at any time suggest the other; and yet nothing done in
consequence, no practical effect given to the coincidence. I do not know
any purely intellectual property that would give to an associated couple
the character of an article of belief; but there is that in the
volitional promptings which seizes hold of any indication leading to an
end, and abides by such instrumentality if it is found to answer. Nay
more, there is a tendency to go beyond the actual experience, and not to
desist until the occurrence of a positive failure or check. So that the
mere repetition of an intellectual impress would not amount to a
conviction without this active element, which, although the source of
many errors, is indispensable to the mental condition of belief. The
legitimate course is to let experience be the corrector of all the
primitive impulses; to take warning by every failure, and to recognise
no other canon of validity. . . . We find after trials, that there is
such a uniformity in nature as enables us to presume that an event
happening to-day will happen also to-morrow, if we can only be sure that
all the circumstances are exactly the same. . . . It is part of the
intuitive tendencies of the mind to generalize in this way; but these
tendencies, being as often wrong as right, have no validity in
themselves; and the real authority is experience. The long series of
trials made since the beginning of observation, has shown how far such
inferences can safely be carried; and we are now in possession of a body
of rules, in harmony with the actual course of nature, for guiding us in
carrying on these operations.

(Ibid., pp. 585-6.)

So that, after all, Mr. Bain regards belief as a case of “intuitive
tendency;” but not a case sui generis. He considers it as included under
the general law of Volition. The spontaneous activity of the brain,
combined with the original property inherent in a painful or pleasurable
stimulus, makes us seize and detain all muscular actions which of
themselves, and directly, bring pleasure or relief; those actions, in
consequence, become, through the law of association, producible by means
of our ideas of pleasure or pain; and it is, in the author’s view, by an
extension of the same general phenomenon, that actions which only
remotely, and after a certain delay, attain our ends, come similarly
under the command of our ideas of those ends. When this command is
established, then, according to him, the phenomenon, Belief, has taken
place; namely, belief in the efficacy of the action to promote the end.
This is our author’s theory of Belief. An obvious objection to it is,
that we entertain beliefs respecting matters in regard to which we have
no wishes, and which have no connexion with any of our ends. But to this
Mr. Bain answers (and his answer is just), that in such cases there is
always a latent imagination that we might have some object at stake on
the reality of the fact we believe, and a feeling that if we had, we
should go forward confidently in the pursuit of any such object. We
quote the following passage for the practical lesson conveyed in it:

A single trial, that nothing has ever happened to impugn, is able of
itself to leave a conviction sufficient to induce reliance under
ordinary circumstances. It is the active prompting of the mind itself
that instigates, and in fact constitutes, the believing temper; unbelief
is an after product, and not the primitive tendency. Edition: current;
Page: [370] Indeed, we may say, that the inborn energy of the brain
gives faith, and experience scepticism. . . . We must treat it [belief]
as a strong primitive manifestation, derived from the natural activity
of the system, and taking its direction and rectification from
experience. The “anticipation of nature,” so strenuously repudiated by
Bacon,[*] is the offspring of this characteristic of the mental system.
In the haste to act, while the indications imbibed from contact with the
world are still scanty, we are sure to extend the application of actual
trials a great deal too far, producing such results as have just been
named. With the active tendency at its maximum, and the exercise of
intelligence and acquired knowledge at the minimum, there can issue
nothing but a quantity of rash enterprises. That these are believed in,
we know from the very fact that they are undertaken. . . . The
respectable name “generalization,” implying the best products of
enlightened scientific research, has also a different meaning,
expressing one of the most erroneous impulses and crudest determinations
of untutored human nature. To extend some familiar and narrow
experience, so as to comprehend cases most distant, is a piece of mere
reckless instinct, demanding the severest discipline for its correction.
. . . Sound belief, instead of being a pacific and gentle growth, is in
reality the battering of a series of strongholds, the conquering of a
country in hostile occupation. This is a fact common both to the
individual and to the race. . . . The only thing for mental philosophy
to do on such a subject, is to represent, as simply and clearly as
possible, those original properties of our constitution that are
chargeable with such wide-spread phenomena. It will probably be long ere
the last of the delusions attributable to this method of believing first
and proving afterwards can be eradicated from humanity. For although all
those primitive impressions that find a speedy contradiction in
realities from which we cannot escape, cease to exercise their sway
after a time, there are other cases less open to correction, and
remaining to the last as portions of our creed.

(Ibid., pp. 582-4.)

It is assuredly a strange anomaly, that so many authors, after having
applied the whole force of their intellects to prove the existence in
the human mind of intellectual or moral instincts, proceed, without any
argument at all, to legitimate and consecrate everything which those
instincts prompt, as if an instinct never could go astray; a
consecration not usually extended to our physical instincts, though even
there we often notice a certain tendency in the same direction, not
sufficient to persuade when there is no predisposition to believe, but
amounting to a considerable makeweight to weak arguments on the side of
an existing prepossession. This grave philosophical, leading to still
graver practical error, is always (as in the passage quoted) duly
rebuked by the author. As a portion, however, of the theory of Belief,
we desiderate a more complete analysis of the psychological process by
which ulterior experience, or a more correct interpretation of
experience, modifies the original tendency so powerfully described by
the author, and subdues belief into subordination and due proportion to
evidence.

Edition: current; Page: [371]
It only remains to speak of Mr. Bain’s theory of Consciousness, which is
the subject of his final chapter. He regards it as being simply the same
thing with discrimination of difference. Consciousness is only awakened
by the shock of the transition from one physical or mental state to
another. Hobbes had remarked, that if any one mode of sensation or
feeling were always present, we should probably be unconscious of its
existence.[*]

There are notable examples to show that one unvarying action upon the
senses fails to give any perception whatever. Take the motion of the
earth about its axis, and through space, whereby we are whirled with
immense velocity, but at a uniform pace, being utterly insensible of the
circumstance. So in a ship at sea, we may be under the same
insensibility, whereas in a carriage we never lose the feeling of being
moved. The explanation is obvious. It is the change from rest to motion
that awakens our sensibility, and conversely from motion to rest. A
uniform condition as respects either state is devoid of any quickening
influence on the mind. Another illustration is supplied by the pressure
of the air on the surface of the body. Here we have an exceedingly
powerful effect upon one of the special senses. The skin is under an
influence exactly of that nature that wakens the feeling of touch, but
no feeling comes. Withdraw any portion of the pressure, as in mounting
in a balloon, and sensibility is developed. A constant impression is
thus to the mind the same as a blank. Our partial unconsciousness as to
our clothing is connected with the constancy of the object. The smallest
change at any time makes us sensible or awake to the contact. If there
were some one sound, of unvarying tone and unremitted continuance,
falling on the ear from the first moment of life to the last, we should
be as unconscious of the existence of that influence as we are of the
pressure of the air. Such a sonorous agency would utterly escape the
knowledge of mankind, until, as in the other case, some accident, or
some discovery in experimental philosophy, had enabled them to suspend
or change the degree of the impression made by it. Except under special
circumstances, we are unconscious of our own weight, which fact
nevertheless can never be absent. It is thus that agencies might exist
without being perceived; remission or change being a primary condition
of our sensibility. It might seem somewhat difficult to imagine us
altogether insensitive to such an influence as light and colour; and yet
if some one hue had been present on the retina from the commencement of
life, we should incontestably have been utterly blind as far as that was
concerned.

(Ibid., pp. 615-16.)

We perceive (in short) or are conscious of, nothing but changes, or
events. Consciousness partakes always of the nature of surprise.

Following out this line of thought, Mr. Bain regards knowledge as
virtually synonymous with consciousness, and points out that we never
have knowledge of one thing by itself. Knowing a thing, means
recognising the differences or agreements between that thing and another
or others.

To know a thing, is to feel it in juxtaposition with some other thing
differing from it or agreeing with it. To be simply impressed with a
sight, sound, or touch, is not to know anything in the proper sense of
the word; knowledge begins when we Edition: current; Page: [372]
recognise other things in the way of comparison with the one. My
knowledge of redness is my comparison of this one sensation with a
number of others differing from or agreeing with it; and as I extend
those comparisons, I extend that knowledge. An absolute redness per se,
like an unvarying pressure, would escape cognition; for supposing it
possible that we were conscious of it, we could not be said to have any
knowledge. Why is it that the same sensation is so differently felt by
different persons—the sensation of red or green to an artist and an
optician—if not that knowledge relates not to the single sensation
itself, but to the others brought into relation with it in the mind?
When I say I know a certain plant, I indicate nothing, until I inform my
hearer what things stand related to it in my mind as contrasting or
agreeing. I may know it as a garden weed, that is, under difference from
the flowers, fruits, and vegetables cultivated in the garden, and under
agreement with the other plants that spring up unsought. I may know it
botanically, that is, under difference and agreement with the other
members of the order, genus, and species. I may know it artistically, or
as compared with other plants on the point of beauty of form and colour.
As an isolated object in my mind, I may have a sensation or a
perception, although not even that in strict truth, but I can have no
knowledge regarding it at all. Thus it is that in the multifarious scene
and chaos of distinguishable impressions, not only do different minds
fasten upon different individual parts, but fastening on the same parts,
arrive at totally different cognitions. Like the two electricities,
which cannot exist the one without the other, or the two poles of the
magnet, which rise and fall together, no mental impression can exist and
be called knowledge, unless in company with some other, as a foil
wherewith to compare it. Left to a single unit of consciousness, the
mental excitement vanishes. In the intellect, as in the emotions, we
live by setting off contrasted states, and consequently no impression
can be defined or characterized, except with reference to its
accompanying foil. We see how difficult it is in language to make a
meaning explicit by a brief announcement; interpretation, as applied to
laws, contracts, testaments, as well as to writing generally, consists
in determining what things the writer excluded as opposites to, and
looked at as agreements with, the thing named. It is thus everywhere in
cognition. A simple impression is tantamount to no impression at all.
Quality, in the last resort, implies relation; although, in logic, the
two are distinguished. Red and blue together in the mind, actuating it
differently, keep one another alive as mental excitement, and the one is
really knowledge of the other. So with the red of to-day and the red of
yesterday, an interval of blank sensation, or of other sensations,
coming between. These two will sustain one another in the cerebral
system, and will mutually be raised to the rank of knowledge. Increase
the comparisons of difference and agreement, and you increase the
knowledge, the character of it being settled by the direction wherein
the foils are sought.

(Ibid., pp. 638-40.)

Such is a brief account of a remarkable book; which, once known and read
by those who are competent judges of it, is sure to take its place in
the very first rank of the order of philosophical speculation to which
it belongs. Of the execution, a very insufficient judgment can be formed
from our extracts. The book is, indeed, a most difficult one to extract
from; for as scarcely any treatise which we know proceeds so much by the
way of cumulative proof and illustration, any extract of moderate
dimensions is much the same sort of specimen as, we will not say a
single stone, but a Edition: current; Page: [373] single row of stones,
might be of a completed edifice. We hope that we may have assisted in
directing the attention of those who are interested in the subject, to
the structure itself; assuring those who belong to the opposite party in
philosophical speculation, that so massive a pile, so rich in the
quantity and quality of its materials, even if they are not disposed to
take up their abode in it, cannot be used even as a quarry without
abundant profit.

Edition: current; Page: [374] Edition: current; Page: [375]


GROTE’S PLATO
 1866

Edition: current; Page: [376]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Dissertations and Discussions, III (1867), 275-379, where the title,
“Plato,” is footnoted: “Edinburgh Review, April, 1866.” Reprinted from
the Edinburgh Review, CXXIII (April, 1866), 297-364, where the article
(unsigned) is headed: “Art. I.—Plato and the other Companions of
Sokrates. By George Grote, F.R.S., &c. 8vo. 3 vols. London: [Murray,]
1865”; the running heads are “Grote’s Plato.” Identified in JSM’s
bibliography as “A review of Grote’s ‘Plato and the other Companions of
Socrates’ in the Edinburgh Review for April 1866” (MacMinn, 97). An
unsigned offprint of the article in the Somerville College Library,
paged 1-68, is titled “Plato / and the other / Companions of Socrates. /
By / George Grote, F.R.S., &c.”; JSM has added under the title in ink
“(Edinburgh Review, 1866)”—his habitual indication when an article was
to be reprinted; there are no alterations or corrections in the
offprint.

In the footnoted variants, “66” indicates Edinburgh Review, “67”
indicates D&D, III, 1st ed. (the copy-text). For an account of the
composition of the essay and related matters, see the Introduction and
the Textual Introduction, xxxvii-xli and xc-xci above.

Edition: current; Page: [377]


Grote’s Plato

the readers of Mr. Grote’s History of Greece were not likely to forget
the hope held out in its concluding volume,[*] that he who had so well
interpreted the political life of Hellas would delineate and judge that
great outburst of speculative thought, by which, as much as by her
freedom, Greece has been to the world what Athens according to Pericles
was to Greece, a course of education.[†] It might have been safely
predicted, that the same conscientious research, the same skilful
discrimination of authenticated fact from traditional misapprehension or
uncertified conjecture, and the same rare power of realizing different
intellectual and moral points of view, which were conspicuous in the
History, and nowhere more than in the memorable chapters on the Sophists
and on Sokrates, would find congenial occupation in tracing out the
genuine lineaments of Plato, Aristotle, and their compeers. But the
present work does more than merely keep the promise of Mr. Grote’s
previous achievements—it reveals new powers: had it not been written the
world at large might never have known, except on trust, the whole range
of his capacities and endowments. Though intellects exercised in the
higher philosophy might well perceive that such a book as the History of
Greece could not have been produced but by a mind similarly disciplined,
the instruction which lay on the surface of that great work was chiefly
civic and political; while the speculations of the Grecian philosophers,
and emphatically of Plato, range over the whole domain of human thought
and curiosity, from etymology up to cosmogony, and from the discipline
of the music-school and the gymnasium to the most vast problems of
metaphysics and ontology. Many even of Mr. Grote’s admirers may not have
been prepared to find, that he would be as much at home in the most
abstract metaphysical speculations as among the concrete realities of
political institutions—would move through the one region with the same
easy mastery as through the other—and would bring before us, along with
the clearest and fullest explanation of ancient thought, mature and
well-weighed opinions of his own, manifesting a command of the entire
field of speculative philosophy which places him in the small number of
the eminent psychologists and metaphysicians of the age.

Edition: current; Page: [378]
The work of which we now give an account, though complete in itself,
brings down the history of Greek philosophy only to Plato and his
generation; but a continuation is promised, embracing at least the
generation of Aristotle; which, by the analogy of the concluding
chapters of the present work, may be construed as implying an estimate
of the Stoics and Epicureans. If to this were added a summary of what is
known to us concerning the Pythagorean revival and the later Academy, no
portion of purely Greek thought would remain untreated of; for
Neoplatonism, an aftergrowth of late date and little intrinsic value,
was a hybrid product of Greek and Oriental speculation, and its place in
history is by the side of Gnosticism. What contact it has with the Greek
mind is with that mind in its decadence; as the little in Plato which is
allied to it belongs chiefly to the decadence of Plato’s own mind. We
are quite reconciled to the exclusion from Mr. Grote’s plan, of this
tedious and unsatisfactory chapter in the history of human intellect.
But such an exposition as he is capable of giving of Aristotle, will be
hardly inferior in value to that of Plato. The latter, however, was the
most needed; for Plato presents greater difficulties than Aristotle to
the modern mind; more of our knowledge of the master, than of the pupil,
is only apparent, and requires to be unlearnt; and much more use has
been made of what the later philosopher can teach us, than of the
earlier.

Though the writings of Plato supply the principal material of Mr.
Grote’s three volumes, the portion of them which does not relate
directly to Plato is of great interest and value. The first two chapters
contain as full an account as our information admits, of the forms of
Greek philosophy which preceded Sokrates; and the two which conclude the
work recount the little which is known (except in the case of Xenophon
it is very little) of the other “Socratici viri”[*] and their
speculations: the Megaric school, commencing with Eukleides, the Cynic,
with Antisthenes, the Cyrenaic or Hedonistic, with Aristippus. All these
were personal companions of Sokrates, and their various and conflicting
streams of thought did not flow out of a primitive intellectual fountain
opened by him, but issued from the rock in different places at the touch
of his magical wand; for it was his profession and practice to make
others think, not to think for them. Concerning Sokrates himself, though
in one sense nearly the whole book relates to him, there is no express
notice in these volumes, the narrative and estimate which we read in the
History of Greece being sufficient.[†]

Some knowledge of the earlier Hellenic thinkers is necessary to a full
understanding of Plato. Unfortunately the materials are defective, and
Edition: current; Page: [379] almost wholly second-hand, a few fragments
only of the original authors having been preserved by the citations of
later writers. We are in possession, however, of what were regarded by
their successors as the fundamental doctrines of each; but there is some
difficulty in knowing what to make of them. These first gropings of the
speculative intellect have so little in common with modern scientific
habits, that the modern mind does not easily accommodate itself to them.
The physical theories seem so absurd, and the metaphysical ones so
unintelligible, that there needs some stress of thought to enable us to
perceive how eminently natural they were. Multiplied failures have
taught us the unwelcome lesson, that man can only arrive at an
understanding of nature by a very circuitous route; that the great
questions are not accessible directly, but through a multitude of
smaller ones, which in the first ardour of their investigations men
overlooked and despised—though they are the only questions sufficiently
simple and near at hand, to disclose the real laws and processes of
nature, with which as keys we are afterwards enabled to unlock such of
her greater mysteries as are really within our reach. This process,
which human impatience was late in thinking of, and slow in learning to
endure, is an eminently artificial one; and the mind which has been
trained to it has become, happily for mankind, so highly artificialized,
that it has forgotten its own natural mode of procedure. The natural
man, in the words of Bacon’s emphatic condemnation, naturam rei in ipsa
re perscrutatur.[*] He neither can nor will lay a regular siege to his
object, approach it by a series of intermediate positions, and possess
himself first of the outworks; he will make but one leap into the
citadel: and since, to his freshly awakened curiosity, no inquiry seems
worth pursuing which promises less than an explanation of the entire
universe, he makes a plausible guess which explains or seems to explain
a few obvious facts, and stretches or twists this into a theory of the
whole. Such theories were thrown up in considerable number and variety
by the early Hellenic mind. Mr. Grote has recounted what is known of
them, and by the application of a clear philosophic intellect to the
results of his own and of German erudition, has made out as much of
their meaning as any one can well hope to do. To render that meaning
intelligible without a considerable effort of thought, exceeds even his
powers; for the terms which embody it have no exact equivalents in
modern language, which, having fitted itself to more definite
conceptions of the problems, and to a certain number of ascertained
solutions, has got rid of many of the vaguenesses and ambiguities to
which the early conjectural solutions were principally indebted for such
plausibility as they possessed.

Edition: current; Page: [380]
These early theories, as we said, may be distinguished into physical and
metaphysical, though the physical hypotheses could not always dispense
with metaphysical aid, and the metaphysical ones were employed to
account for physical phenomena. In the physical, some one or more
substances familiar to experience were assumed as the element or
elements which, variously transformed, are the material of the entire
universe; and all the phenomena of nature were supposed to be produced
by the powers, properties, or essences of these elements, or by hidden
forces residing in them. Thales ascribed this cosmic universality to
water, Anaximenes to air: we must remember that the ancients called many
things water and air which are not so styled in modern physics.
Empedokles explained all things by the mixture and mutual action of
earth, water, air, and fire. These material substances were usually
supposed to require the concurrence of certain abstract entities called
Wet and Dry, Cold and Hot, Soft and Hard, Heavy and Light, &c., which
were the immediate if not ultimate agents in the generation of
phenomena.* It would be a mistake were we to imagine that these and
similar hypotheses were really absurd, until proved so by the subsequent
course of inductive investigation. A more artful examination of nature
has since shown that the supposed elements are not real elements but
compounds, and that the generalized properties, which were mistaken for
causative agencies, are the products of incorrect generalization and
abstraction—notiones temerè à rebus abstractæ.[*] But this was not, and
could not be, known at the time when the hypotheses were framed. In the
meanwhile, they served as first steps in that comparison of phenomena in
respect of their likenesses and differences, which is the preparation
for the discovery of their laws; and the process of applying the
hypotheses to the explanation of facts other than those which had
suggested them, was continually bringing into view fresh points of
likeness and difference, and laying the foundation for less imperfect
hypotheses. The metaphysical theories, on the other hand, which grounded
their conception of the universe not on physical agencies, but on the
largest and vaguest abstractions—the One, the Same, the Different, that
which Is, that which Becomes—seem, to us, not so much erroneous as
unmeaning: we find it difficult to conceive what can have been in the
thoughts of men who could offer matter like this as an explanation of
anything. By we, must be understood the physicists, the
experimentalists, the Baconians; since the German Transcendentalists
find much more signification in these than in Edition: current; Page:
[381] the physical hypotheses. For, indeed, their Ontology is
essentially a return to this first stage of human speculation—a
reproduction of the same methods, the same questions, and to a great
degree the same answers, sometimes under a superficial varnish of modern
inductive philosophy. Hegel moves among the same vague abstractions as
the earliest tyros in metaphysical thought; his dialectics recall the
Parmenides of Plato’s dialogue, while his substantive doctrines are in
great part a reproduction of Herakleitus. If we turn back to
Anaximander, the earliest known speculative philosopher after his
townsman Thales, we find already the fundamental notions of
Transcendentalism.

He adopted as the foundation of his hypothesis a substance which he
called the Infinite or Indeterminate. Under this name he conceived Body
simply, without any positive or determinate properties, yet including
the fundamental contraries Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry, &c., in a potential or
latent state, including further a self-changing and self-developing
force, and being moreover immortal and indestructible. By this inherent
force, and by the evolution of one or more of these dormant contrary
qualities, were generated the various definite substances of nature—Air,
Fire, Water, &c.*

We have here the fundamental antithesis of the Transcendentalists,
Matter and Form; while the conception of an abstract Body, devoid of
properties, but with a potentiality of evolving them from itself by an
indwelling force, is the transcendental Noumenon, as contrasted with
Phænomenon. Again, the Ens of Parmenides, Being in General, “which is
always, and cannot properly be called either past or future,” which is
not “really generated or destroyed, but only in appearence to us, or
relatively to our apprehension,” which “is essentially One, and cannot
be divided,”† what is it (as Mr. Grote remarks)‡ but the Absolute of the
modern Ontologists? a little in advance of them however, for the Eleatic
philosopher left to his Absolute one quality cognisable by man, that of
Extension, but the Transcendentalists refuse it even that, and yet
maintain (some of them at least) that it is knowable. Even the almost
Asiatic mysticism of Pythagoras respecting Number, has, as Mr. Grote
points out,§ its exact equivalent in German nineteenth-century
philosophy. When numbers, mere abstract properties of things, are
mistaken for actual things, they are soon supposed to exert powers, and
have as good a chance as anything else of finding a philosopher to
instal them as the ruling power of the universe.

Both these veins of speculation—the physical and the metaphysical—were
temporarily thrown into the shade by the new turn given to the
philosophic mind by Sokrates: but for a short time only; for the
ambitious striving for a theory of the universe reappears in its most
metaphysical form Edition: current; Page: [382] in the later productions
of his greatest disciple, Plato. The originality of Sokrates, which was
of the highest order, consisted chiefly in his method. Yet his principal
instrument had been in part prepared for him by the pupil of Parmenides,
Zeno of Elea, “who stands announced on the authority of Aristotle as the
inventor of dialectic; that is, as the first person, of whose skill in
the art of cross-examination and refutation conspicuous illustrative
specimens were preserved.”* The speciality of Zeno consisted in bringing
prominently forward the difficulties and objections to which a theory
was liable: not in the modern manner, by producing facts inconsistent
with it, but rather by tracing its consequences, and reducing it to a
logical contradiction; a mode of arguing which he more particularly
employed against those who opposed his master’s doctrine of the Absolute
and Indivisible One, and maintained with Herakleitus that the universe
is not One but Many. The celebrated paradoxes by which Zeno is best
known, his arguments against the reality of Motion, Mr. Grote† considers
neither as sceptical fallacies nor logical puzzles, but as bonâ fide
arguments, not intended to disprove motion as a phenomenal fact, but to
assert its relative character, as a state of our own
consciousness—incapable of being, in any true and consistent meaning,
predicated of the Ens Unum, or Absolute, which the Parmenidean doctrine
regarded as immoveable. However this may be, these arguments were quite
in keeping with the vocation of Zeno for what Mr. Grote happily terms
the negative arm of philosophy[*]—that which tests the truth of theories
by the difficulties which they are bound to meet; and if he often
mistook verbal difficulties for real, this was inevitable at first, and
Plato frequently did the same.

It was reserved for Sokrates, and for Plato, who, whether as the
interpreter or continuator of Sokrates, can never be severed from him,
to exalt this negative arm of philosophy to a perfection never since
surpassed, and to provide it with its greatest, most interesting, and
most indispensable field of exercise, the generalities relating to life
and conduct. These great men originated the thought, that, like every
other part of the practice of life, morals and politics are an affair of
science, to be understood only after severe study and special training;
an indispensable part of which consists in acquiring the habit of
considering, not merely what can be said in favour of a doctrine, but
what can be said against it; of sifting opinions, and never accepting
any until it has emerged victorious over every logical, still more than
over every practical objection. These two principles—the necessity of
Edition: current; Page: [383] a scientific basis and method for ethics
and politics, and of rigorous negative dialectics as a part of that
method, are the greatest of the many lessons to be learnt from Plato;
and it is because the modern mind has in a great measure laid both these
lessons, especially the latter of them, aside, that we regard the
Platonic writings as among the most precious of the intellectual
treasures bequeathed to us by antiquity. Mr. Grote is of the same
opinion, and has rendered, by the work before us, an inappreciable
service, in facilitating the study to those who can read the original,
and making the results accessible to those who cannot.

He first relates the biography of Plato, as far as it can be constructed
from the extant authorities. He then treats of the Platonic Canon; and
after a comparison and ponderation of evidence, equal in merit to any in
his History, accepts as works of Plato the entire list recognised by the
Alexandrian critics, and admitted by all scholars until for the first
time disputed by German editors and commentators in the present century.
A chapter is next devoted to a general view of the Platonic writings;
and the remainder of the work (except the final chapters on the minor
Sokratics), consists of a minute analysis and compte rendu of each
dialogue separately. In this analysis are comprehended the following
elements, which are far from being kept as separate in fact as we must
keep them in description. First, a complete abstract of the dialogue,
omitting no idea, and no important development. Attention is next drawn
to the light which the dialogue throws on Plato’s doctrine or method,
and the bearing which it has upon the author’s general conception of
Plato and his writings. Lastly, the thoughts on which the particular
dialogue turns, or which are struck out in the course of it, are
disentangled from the context, and critically examined, sometimes at
considerable length, both from Plato’s point of view and from the
author’s; and when the verdict is adverse, we are shown the author’s own
view of the same questions, and its justification. The book is thus a
perfect treasury of instructive discussions on the most important
questions of philosophy, speculative and practical; while at the same
time it is a quite complete account of Plato. Plato himself, not
anybody’s interpretation of him, is brought before us. Nothing needs be
taken on trust, except the fidelity of the abstract, which is perfect.
We lose, of course, Plato’s dramatic power, his refined comedy, and the
magic of his style, the reproduction of which (could any one hope to
succeed in it) would be the work, not of an expositor, but of a
translator. But the thoughts are there, exactly as they are, and exactly
where they are, in the Platonic writings. The account of each dialogue
is thus a kind of complete work in itself—a plan necessarily involving
much repetition, as the same idea or Platonic peculiarity, being
manifested in several dialogues, gives fresh occasion for the same line
of remark. These repetitions have been censured by some critics from
Edition: current; Page: [384] a literary point of view, as signs of want
of skill in composition;[*] but this is to mistake the author’s purpose.
He does not lay himself open to the reproach from carelessness or
awkwardness; he altogether disregards and defies it. What would be
imperfections in a picture of Plato addressed to the imagination, are
merits in what is meant to be an aid or substitute for the study of the
philosopher in detail. Mr. Grote intended the reader to judge of Plato
for himself—to find in each chapter what he would have found in the
corresponding dialogue, together with all that is necessary for
understanding it and estimating its value. His own opinions on Plato and
the Platonic topics turn up often, because every dialogue contains fresh
evidence bearing on them. The alternative was indeed open to him of
using references instead of repetitions; and had he cared more for his
literary reputation, and less for his subject, he would have adopted it.
But those who read for instruction will generally prefer that the things
they need to be reminded of should be told over again in a form and
language adapted to the special occasion, rather than be compelled to
search for them in another chapter, where they are exhibited in a quite
different framework of circumstances. Even in an artistic point of view,
it is too narrow a conception of art, to exclude that which produces its
effect by an accumulation of small touches. Besides, many of Mr. Grote’s
views being contrary to received opinion, he was bound to give some idea
of the mass of evidence on which they rest. Those who find it tiresome
to have this evidence noted en passant where it occurs, would have far
more reason to complain if it had been culled out and laid in a single
heap, in which case we may surmise that few of them would have taken the
trouble even to look at it.

In truth, there are few, if any, ancient authors concerning whose mind
and purpose so many demonstrably false opinions are current, as
concerning Plato; and there is probably no writer, of merit comparable
to his, and of whom so many writings survive, who leaves us in so much
real uncertainty respecting his opinions. His works—except a few
letters, which (allowing them, with Mr. Grote, to be authentic) were
written late in life, and have mostly a biographic rather than a
philosophical interest—are exclusively in the form of dialogue; and he
himself is never one of the interlocutors. Not one of the opinions
contained in them is presented as his own, nor in any connexion with
himself. There certainly is, in almost every dialogue, one principal
speaker, who either as confuter or instructor carries off the honours of
the discussion. But this chief speaker, in the great majority of cases,
is not a fictitious or unknown person, who could only be looked on as
the author’s own spokesman, but a philosopher with a well-marked
intellectual Edition: current; Page: [385] individuality of his own, and
regarded by Plato himself with the deepest reverence. The question
arises, how far the opinions put into the mouth of Sokrates are those of
the real Sokrates, or of Plato speaking in his name? and if the former,
whether Plato desired to be considered as adopting them? But, again,
Sokrates, though generally the leading speaker, is not always so. In one
dialogue, the Parmenides, he takes part in the discussion, but only to
be powerfully confuted by that veteran philosopher. In the Sophistes and
the Politikos he is a mere listener, while the place usually filled by
him is occupied by a nameless stranger from Elea; though these two
dialogues are an avowed continuation of the Theætetus, in which Sokrates
takes the leading part. In Timæus and Kritias, the persons bearing those
names are the teachers, and Sokrates an approving and admiring hearer.
In the Leges and Epinomis he does not appear at all. Some reason there
must have been for these diversities, but it neither shows itself in the
dialogues, nor is known by external evidence. All this would have been
of little consequence, if the dialogues had exhibited a consistent
system of opinions, always adhered to and always coming out victorious.
But so far is this from being the case, that the result of a large
proportion of them is merely negative, many opinions in succession being
tried and rejected, and the question finally left unsolved. When an
opinion does seem to prevail, it almost always happens that in some
other dialogue that same opinion is either refuted, or shown to involve
difficulties which, though frequently passed over, are never resolved.
Some of the ancient critics were hence led to suspect that Plato had, as
his master professed to have, no positive opinions; a supposition for
which plausible arguments might be drawn from many of the dialogues, but
which is quite inconsistent with the spirit of others. Besides, a
philosopher who for nearly forty years lectured in open school to
numerous audiences, must have had something positive to teach them: mere
negation and confutation raise up imitators, but not disciples.

To these various puzzles the German editors and critics add
another—namely, which of the writings ascribed to Plato are really his
own. They relieve their author from the responsibility of contradictory
opinions, by rejecting many dialogues as spurious, on account of
something in them that is inconsistent with what is said in some other
dialogue, or with what the critic is of opinion that Plato must have
thought, or on the mere ground of inferior merit as a composition; for
of Plato alone among writers or artists it seems to be imagined that he
cannot have produced any work not equal to his finest. Mr. Grote gains a
triumphant victory over these critics, by exhibiting the overwhelming
strength of the external testimony; showing that the rejections grounded
on internal evidence proceed on an ideal of Plato which is a mere
imagination of the critic; and pointing out that what are deemed
evidences of unauthenticity in the rejected dialogues, are Edition:
current; Page: [386] equally found in those which no one rejects, or
could reject, since they are the type itself, which the others are
thrown out for not conforming to. If we could add to our knowledge of
what Plato’s writings were, any authentic information respecting the
order in which they were written, their inconsistencies might be found
to correspond with successive stages of the progress of his own mind.
But we have nothing on this subject save conjectures, each founded on an
antecedent theory of the very matter which it is intended to clear up.
The imperfect publicity which ancient writings obtained at their first
appearance, consisting chiefly in being read aloud by the author, or by
some one whom he had allowed to take a copy, makes it impossible to fix
the chronological succession of a writer’s works, when they are at all
numerous. Several dialogues, by their allusions to historical events,
give indication of a date to which it is supposed that they must have
been subsequent; but even this supposition is uncertain, since, as we
are informed by Dionysius,[*] Plato retouched and corrected his writings
up to the latest period of his life. When a dialogue professes to be a
continuation of another dialogue, it was probably, though not certainly,
the latest composed of the two. There is a presumption that the
dialogues of mere search preceded those which expound and enforce some
definite doctrine; though, as one of the best German critics of Plato
remarks,* this must be taken with a limitation, since he may have
continued to produce dialogues of search after those of exposition
began. Finally, direct testimony combines with internal probability in
placing the Leges after the Republic, and near the end of Plato’s
career. This is nearly all the help which the works themselves give
towards ascertaining the order of their composition; but we have a
precious though limited item of information from Aristotle, respecting
some metaphysical doctrines taught by Plato in his latest lectures,
varying considerably from those we read in any of the dialogues, but
towards which the line of thought in several of them seems to be leading
up.[†] We may, therefore, place those particular dialogues among the
last of his compositions, and in the order of their approach to what we
are told of his final teachings. This indication, agreeing with other
internal evidence, gives the following as the latest terms of the
series:—Republic, Timæus (with its unfinished appendage Kritias), Leges,
with its supplement the Epinomis—the first probably separated by a
considerable Edition: current; Page: [387] interval of time from the two
last; and the Philebus, which we believe to be later than the Republic,
probably coming in at some intermediate point.

Such being the paucity of direct evidence of Plato’s opinions and
purposes, there was no check to the latitude which readers and admirers
might give themselves in deducing theories from the general tone of his
writings. Much, no doubt, may be thence inferred, but it requires more
than a knowledge of Plato to distinguish what. Great men and great
writers outlive the ideas and most of the monuments of their time, and
descend to posterity disjoined from the element in which they lived, and
by which their thoughts ought to be interpreted. This is especially the
case with great reformers. How continually we should misunderstand the
deliverances of Luther, of Fichte, of Bentham, of Voltaire, of Rousseau,
Fourier, Owen—may we add of Carlyle? if we knew nothing of their age,
and of the men and things they attacked, but what they themselves tell
us. Men who are in open quarrel with the whole body of their
contemporaries, do not make the discriminations which posterity is bound
to make; and their sweeping denunciations do not imply, from them, what
such statements would mean from persons perhaps greatly their inferiors,
but not standing so far off from the rest of the world as to efface all
differences of distance. This caution has been disregarded and ignored
in Plato’s case; yet none of the great thinkers and writers who have
come down to us require it more. When Plato says hard things of his
countrymen, or of any class or profession among them, he is judging them
by their divergence from his own standard, which was, no doubt, in many
respects superior to theirs (though by no means so in all respects), but
which he himself proclaimed to be a new and original one, and which
certainly differed as widely from the modern European or English
standard as from the Athenian. But the denunciations which he levels at
them from his own point of view, are almost always interpreted as from
ours, and we fancy that their conduct and feelings, if known to us in
detail, would appear to us as blameable and contemptible as Plato deemed
them; whereas we should find them, with a few superficial differences,
very like our own; and it is most certain that Plato, if he returned to
life, would be to the full as contemptuous of our statesmen, lawyers,
clergy, professors, authors, and all others among us who lay claim to
mental superiority, as he ever was of the corresponding classes at
Athens; while they, on their part, would regard him very much as they
regard other freethinkers, socialists, and visionary reformers of the
world.

The opinion which commonly prevails about Plato is something like the
following. The Athenians, and the other Greeks, had become deeply
demoralized by a set of impostors called Sophists—pretenders to
universal knowledge, and adepts at disconcerting simple minds by
entangling them in a mesh of words—who corrupted young men of fortune,
by denying moral Edition: current; Page: [388] distinctions, and
teaching the art of misleading a popular assembly. The lives and
intellectual activity of Sokrates and Plato had for their chief object
to counteract the doctrines and influence of these men. They devoted
themselves to vindicating the cause of virtue against immoral
subtleties; but they came too late; the evil was too far advanced for
cure, and the ruin of Greece was ultimately the consequence of the
corruption engendered by the Sophists. In Philosophy proper, the
speculations of Plato are supposed to have been guided by a similar
purpose. He was the founder and chief of the Idealist or Spiritualist
school, against the Materialistic or Sensational, which under the
auspices of the Sophists, is asserted to have been generally prevalent;
and was the champion of the intuitive or à priori character of moral
truth, against what is regarded, by most of the Platonic critics, as the
low and degrading doctrine of Utility.

Readers of Mr. Grote’s History are acquainted with the strong case which
is there made out against this common theory.[*] Mr. Grote disbelieves
the alleged moral corruption as a fact; and denies positively that the
Sophists were the cause of it, or that the persons so called had any
doctrines in common, much less the immoral ones imputed to them. He
affirms that there is no evidence that any one of them taught the
opinions alleged, and full proof that some taught the reverse: That the
Sophists were not a sect, but the general body of teachers by
profession, and, as is everywhere the case with professional teachers as
a class, the moral and prudential opinions they taught were the common
and orthodox ones of their country: That Plato’s quarrel was precisely
with those common opinions, and his antagonism to the Sophists a mere
consequence of this; and his testimony, were it far stronger than it is,
has no value against them, unless we are willing to extend our
condemnation, as he did, to the ways of mankind in general. These views
of Mr. Grote, which we are satisfied are true to the letter, receive
continual confirmation from his survey of the Platonic writings; and we
think it possible even to strengthen his argument, by showing that the
case presented against the Sophists on Plato’s authority, is
contradicted by Plato’s own representation of them.

First, who were the Sophists? In the more lax use of the word, it was a
name for speculative men in general. All the early philosophers whose
theories are presented in Mr. Grote’s first two chapters, wereacalleda
Sophists in ordinary parlance; especially when, as was probably the case
with all of them, they taught orally, and took money for their teaching.
M. Boeckh says of one of Plato’s cotemporaries, the famous mathematician
Eudoxus, “he lived as a Sophist, which means, he taught and gave
lectures.”* Edition: current; Page: [389] Against these men, as a body,
no accusation is brought, nor had Plato any hostility to them. But the
Sophists, emphatically so called, were those who speculated on human, as
distinguished from cosmic, questions; who made profession of civil
wisdom, and undertook to instruct men in the knowledge which qualifies
for social or political life. As one whose whole time was passed in
discussing these topics, Sokrates was counted among Sophists, both
during his life and after his death. Æschines, in the oration against
Timarchus, gives him that title.[*] Isokrates, himself called a Sophist
in an oration of Demosthenes,† alludes distinctly to Plato as being
one.‡ A Sophist named Mikkus is introduced in the Platonic Lysis as a
companion and eulogist (ἐπαινέτης) of Sokrates. But the most conspicuous
Sophists cotemporary with Sokrates, the supposed chiefs of the immoral
and corrupting teachers against whom he is said to have warred, were
Protagoras, Prodikus, and Hippias. They are all three introduced into
the great and many-sided Platonic composition called Protagoras, and are
often referred to by name in other dialogues, Hippias even having two to
himself.[†] Now, while there is an undisguised purpose on Plato’s part
to lower the reputation of these men, and convict them of not
understanding what they professed to teach, not a thought or a sentiment
is ascribed to them of any immoral tendency, while they often appear in
the character of serious and impressive exhorters to virtue.

With regard to Protagoras in particular, the discourse which he is made
to deliver on the moral virtues is justly considered by Mr. Grote as
“one of the best parts of the Platonic writings.”§ It springs out of a
doubt raised, seriously or ironically, by Sokrates, whether virtue is
teachable, on the ground that there are no recognised teachers of it, as
there are of other things. Protagoras admits the fact, and says that the
reason why there are no express teachers of virtue is that all mankind
teach it. Artistic or professional skill in any special department needs
only be possessed by a Edition: current; Page: [390] few, for the
benefit of the rest; but social and civic virtue, consisting in justice
and self-restraint, is indispensable in every one; and as the welfare of
each imperatively requires this virtue in others, every one inculcates
it on all. A highly philosophical as well as eloquent exposition
follows,

of the growth and propagation of common sense—the common, established,
ethical and social sentiment among a community; sentiment neither
dictated in the beginning by any scientific or artistic lawgiver; nor
personified in any special guild of craftsmen apart from the remaining
community; nor inculcated by any formal professional teachers; nor
tested by analysis; nor verified by comparison with any objective
standard; but self-sown and self-asserting, stamped, multiplied, and
kept in circulation by the unpremeditated conspiracy of the general
public—the omnipresent agency of King Nomos* and his numerous
volunteers.†

This common standard of virtue Protagoras fully accepts. He takes it
“for granted that justice, virtue, good, evil, &c., are known,
indisputable, determinate data, fully understood and unanimously
interpreted.”‡ He pretends not to set right the general opinion, but
“teaches in his eloquent expositions and interpretations the same
morality, public and private, that every one else teaches; while he can
perform the work of teaching somewhat more effectively than they:”§ and
“what he pretends to do, beyond the general public, he really can do.”¶
Sokrates (or Plato under his name) not accepting this common standard,
and not considering justice, virtue, good, and evil, as things
understood, but as things whose essence, and the proper meaning of the
words, remain to be found out, of course contests the point with
Protagoras; and bringing to bear on him the whole power of the Sokratic
cross-examination, convicts him of being unable to give any definition
or theory of these things; an incapacity which, in Platonic speech, goes
by the name of not knowing what they are. The inability of Protagoras to
discuss, and of his opinions to resist logical scrutiny, is driven home
against the Sophist with great force. But it is remarkable that Edition:
current; Page: [391] Protagoras, in answering the questions of Sokrates,
whenever required to choose between two opinions, one of which is really
or apparently the more moral or elevating, not only chooses the loftier
doctrine, but declares that no other choice would be agreeable to his
past life, to which he repeatedly appeals as not permitting him to
concede anything that would lower the claims or dignity of virtue; thus
proving (as far as anything put into his mouth by Plato can prove it),
not only that he had never taught other than virtuous doctrines, but
that he had an established reputation both for virtuous teaching, and
for an exemplary and dignified life. Finally, it is Sokrates who, in
this dialogue, maintains the “degrading” doctrine of Utilitarianism—at
least the part most odious to its impugners, the doctrine of Hedonism,
that Pleasure and the absence of Pain are the ends of morality; in
opposition to Protagoras, to whom that opinion is repugnant; a reversal
of the parts assigned to the two teachers by the German commentators,
very embarrassing to some of them, who, rather than impute to Plato so
“low” a doctrine, resort to the absurd supposition that one of the
finest specimens of analysis in all his writings is ironical, intended
to ridicule a Sophist who is not even represented as agreeing with it.
Let us add, that though at first sore under his confutation by Sokrates,
Protagoras parts with him on excellent terms, and predicts for him, at
the conclusion of the dialogue, great eminence in wisdom.

Prodikus of Keios has no dialogue devoted to himself, nor is Sokrates
ever introduced as confuting him. Except a few touches of good-humoured
ridicule on his subtle verbal distinctions, chiefly found in the
Protagoras, and probably intended not so much for disparagement as to
heighten the dramatic interest of that eminently dramatic dialogue; and
except that he comes in for his share of the raillery kept up against
the Sophists generally about the money they took from their pupils,
Prodikus is treated by Plato with marked respect. Sokrates not only
confesses intellectual obligations to him, but speaks of him more than
once, at least semi-seriously, as his teacher; and is made to say in the
Theætetus,* that in conversing with young men, he is apt at discerning
those to whom he can be of no use, and judging by whom they will be
benefited, and that he has handed over many to Prodikus—a sure proof
that in Plato’s opinion Prodikus was not only no corrupter of youth, but
improving to them. As a matter of fact, we know that Prodikus was the
author of the celebrated mythe or apologue called “The Choice of
Hercules,” one of the most impressive exhortations in ancient literature
to a life of labour and self-denial in preference to one of ease and
pleasure. The substance of this composition is preserved by Edition:
current; Page: [392] Xenophon, who, in his Memorabilia, introduces
Sokrates repeating it to Aristippus, and declaring that it was a
favourite lecture of Prodikus, one of those which he oftenest
delivered;* and it bears a nearer resemblance than anything in Plato to
the moral teachings ascribed by Xenophon to the real Sokrates. Prodikus,
therefore, is out of the question in any charge against the Sophists of
immoral teaching or influence.

Hippias, a man conspicuous among his cotemporaries for the rare variety
of his accomplishments, is treated by Plato more disrespectfully. The
two dialogues called by his name not only exhibit him as (like
Protagoras) unable to cope with Sokrates in close discussion, or give a
philosophic theory of the subjects on which he was accustomed to
discourse, but load him with ridicule, of a less refined character than
usual with Plato, for his naïf vanity and self-confidence. It is
possible that the real Hippias may have been open to ridicule on this
account; but from any vestige of immoral or corrupt teaching the Hippias
of Plato is as clear as his Protagoras and his Prodikus. In the Second
Hippias, that Sophist is introduced as having just finished delivering,
with great applause, an encomium on the character of Achilles in the
Iliad, as contrasted with Ulysses in the Odyssey, asserting the great
moral superiority of the former. Now, even the better Greeks did not
usually give so marked a preference to the direct, frank, and outspoken
type of character, over one which aimed at good objects by skilful craft
and dissimulation; so that Hippias stands represented by Plato as one
whose moral standard, so far as it differed from the common one, was
exceptionally high and noble—as that of Sophokles is shown to have been
by the character of Neoptolemus, contrasted with that of Ulysses in the
Philoktetes.[*] The Sophist maintains this high estimate of veracity and
sincerity throughout the dialogue; while the only ethical doctrine which
is malè sonans is assigned to Sokrates himself, who, by a series of
arguments which Hippias is totally unable to refute, contends that one
who speaks falsehood knowingly is less bad than one who speaks it
unknowingly, and (as a general thesis) that “those who hurt mankind, or
cheat, or lie, or do wrong wilfully, are better than those who do the
same unwillingly.”† Mr. Grote may well say that

if this dialogue had come down to us with the parts inverted, and with
the reasoning of Sokrates assigned to Hippias, most critics would
probably have produced it as a tissue of sophistry, justifying the harsh
epithets which they bestow upon the Athenian Sophists, as persons who
considered truth and falsehood to be on a Edition: current; Page: [393]
par—subverters of morality, and corrupters of the youth of Athens. But
as we read it, all that which in the mouth of Hippias would have passed
for sophistry, is here put forward by Sokrates; while Hippias not only
resists his conclusions, and adheres to the received ethical sentiment
tenaciously, even when he is unable to defend it, but hates the
propositions forced upon him, protests against the perverse captiousness
of Sokrates, and requires much pressing to induce him to continue the
debate.*

It is obvious what advantage Melêtus and Anytus might have derived from
this thesis of Sokrates, if they had brought it up against him before
the Dikasts; though it is merely a paradoxical form which, as we know
from Xenophon,[*] the real Sokrates gave to one of his favourite
opinions, adopted and strenuously maintained by Plato, that the root of
all moral excellence is knowledge.

Except these three distinguished men, the only other Sophists, in the
more limited sense, who are shown up by Plato, or brought by him into
collision with Sokrates, are the two brothers in the Euthydemus; who are
not represented as persons of any celebrity (though somebody of the name
of Euthydemus is mentioned in the Kratylus in connexion with a
philosophical paradox), but as old men who have passed their lives in
teaching gymnastic and military exercises, together with rhetoric, and
have only quite lately turned their attention to dialectics, or the art
of discussion. We know nothing otherwise of these persons, who may have
been entirely fictitious, and in any case the care taken to describe
them as novices in their art precludes the supposition of their being
intended as representative men. The purpose of the dialogue is obviously
to rebut the accusation brought against Sokrates, and doubtless also
against Plato, of being jugglers with words, and dealers in logical
puzzles; which is done by exhibiting, on the one hand, a caricature of
the most absurd logical juggling in the persons of Euthydemus and
Dionysodorus, and on the other, an illustrative specimen of Plato’s
ideal of the genuinely Sokratic process—real Dialectic, contrasted with
Eristic; the one merely embarrassing and humiliating an ingenuous
student, by involving him through verbal ambiguities in obvious
absurdities; the other, encouraging and stimulating him to vigorous
exercise of his own mind in clearing his thoughts from confusion. Mr.
Grote’s comments on this dialogue, as on most of the others, are
singularly interesting and valuable. It suffices here to observe that
the purpose of the Euthydemus is not to discredit anybody, but to repel
the attacks made on dialectic, by exhibiting the good form of it in
marked opposition to the bad.

There is thus absolutely nothing in Plato’s representation of particular
Sophists that gives countenance to the reproaches usually cast upon
them. Edition: current; Page: [394] There is, however, another class of
teachers on whom he is more severe, and into whose mouth he does, though
but in one instance, put immoral doctrines. These are the Rhetoricians,
or teachers of oratory; a vocation sometimes combined with that of
Sophist, but carefully distinguished from it by Plato, in that one of
his works in which rhetoric is most depreciated. The types exhibited of
the class are Gorgias, Polus, and Thrasymachus, all of whom Sokrates is
introduced as triumphantly confuting. As there is thus something more of
foundation for the common interpretation of Plato’s attacks on the
rhetoricians, than of those on the Sophists, it is worth showing how
very little that something amounts to.

Rhetoric, being the art of persuasion, is necessarily open to the
reproach that it may be used indifferently in behalf of wrong and right,
and may avail to “make the worse appear the better reason.”[*] But so
far was it in Greece from being taught or recommended for this purpose
by its popular teachers, that Gorgias, the most celebrated of them, in
the dialogue bearing his name, and intended to lay rhetoric and the
rhetoricians prostrate in the dust, is represented as emphatically
deprecating such a use of it. After extolling, in magnificent terms, the
value of his art, the general power it gives of attaining objects, and
the ascendancy it confers in the State, he proceeds to say that, like
all other powers, it should be used justly; and as gymnastic teachers
are not blamed, or expelled from the city, if any one trained by them
abuses the bodily strength he has acquired, by assaulting his parents or
his friends, so the teachers of rhetoric are not in fault if their
pupils make an unjust use of the valuable talent bestowed upon them;
“for they (the teachers) bestowed it to be rightly used, against the
enemies of the State and against evil-doers, not in aggression, but in
defence.”[†] Thus far Gorgias; who, even in this most polemic dialogue,
is treated with considerable respect, and has his dignity saved by being
withdrawn from the Sokratic cross-examination when the conflict begins
to grow serious. We may fairly presume that his teaching was as far
above all moral reproach as that of Isokrates, the most famous and
successful Grecian rhetorical teacher whose works have come down to
us—to whose earnest and impressive inculcation of the moral virtues it
is sufficient to allude.

The dispute is taken up by Polus, another teacher of rhetoric,
represented as a much younger and very petulant man, between whom and
Sokrates there is a discussion of a very dramatic character, with much
vehemence on one side, and sarcasm and irony on the other. Sokrates
asserts that to do injustice is the greatest of evils—a far worse one
than to be unjustly done by: while Polus maintains, on the contrary,
that an unjust man who escapes punishment, and practises injustice on so
great a scale as Edition: current; Page: [395] to achieve signal
success—especially he who can make himself despot of his city—is
supremely enviable. Now this, which seems to be evidence on the side of
the common theory, is really a strong confirmation of Mr. Grote’s; for
no reader of Plato can be unaware that what Polus here expresses (though
disclaimed by the Platonic Protagoras as a vulgar prejudice)* was the
received opinion and established sentiment of the Grecian world. Polus
appeals to it, and says—“Ask any of the persons present:” to which
Sokrates answers—“Instead of refuting me by argument, you, like a
pleader in a court of justice, overwhelm me with witnesses. No doubt all
the testimony is on your side. If you ask Nicias” (the most morally
respected citizen and politician of his time), “or Aristokrates, or the
whole family of Pericles, or any family you think fit—in short, any
Athenian or any foreigner, they will all assent; but I, one man, do not
assent, and the only witness I will call is yourself; unless I can
convince you that I am in the right, I shall consider myself to have
done nothing.”[*] Similar evidence of the universal opinion appears at
every turn in the Platonic dialogues. Whether it is the ambitious and
unprincipled Alcibiades, or the youthful and inquiring Theages, or the
two grave and reverend elders from Crete and Lacedæmon who figure in the
Leges, they all speak with the same voice: the usurping despot, and
every one who is eminently successful in injustice, is a man to be
envied—such a man (they usually add) as we, and all the world, and you
yourself, Sokrates, if you could, would wish to be. Sokrates claims
complete originality in the contrary opinion, that injustice is an evil,
and the greatest that can befall any one—a doctrine which, through the
teachings of Plato himself, of the Stoics, and of some of the forms of
Christianity, has grown so familiar to us, that it has become a truism,
and even a cant; and moderns are ready to conclude offhand that not to
profess it implies a denial of moral obligation. But look at Polus
himself in the dialogue. He is asked by Sokrates—“You think it a worse
thing (κάκιον) to be injured than to injure. Do you also think it a
baser, or more shameful thing (αἴσχιον)?” Polus acknowledges the
reverse: and Sokrates goes on to prove (by a fallacious argument,
however), that whatever is more αἰσχρόν must be more κακόν.[†] Now this
distinction of Polus is exactly that which the Greeks drew. Their
opinion, that a wicked man would be happy if he could succeed in his
wickedness, did not make them less abhor the bad man. He was to be
restrained, punished, and, if need be, Edition: current; Page: [396]
extirpated, not because his guilt was an evil to himself, but because it
was an evil to others. He was looked upon as one who sought, and, if
successful, obtained, good to himself by the damage and suffering of
other people, and who was therefore not to be tolerated by them unless
on compulsion. This is a different doctrine from the common one of
modern moralists, but not an immoral doctrine; and even if it were, the
Sophists and rhetoricians did not invent it, but found it universal. The
speeches of Glaukon and Adeimantus, in the Second Book of the Republic,
set forth this view of the case. Both these speakers strenuously
disapprove the unjust life, and are anxious to be convinced that it is a
calamity to the evil-doer. But, according to them, all mankind, even
those who most inculcate justice, inculcate it as self-sacrifice,
describing the life of the just man as hard and difficult, that of the
unjust as pleasant and easy. The very best of them represent justice as
personally desirable only on account of the good reputation and social
consideration which attend it, implying that one who could acquire the
reputation and rewards of justice without the reality, would be
supremely fortunate, possessing the prize without the sacrifices, while
he who had the reality, but missed the rewards, would be utterly
miserable. Any man would be unjust if he possessed the ring of Gyges,
which rendered the wearer invisible at pleasure. With this memorable
testimony as to what was the general belief, it is mere ignorance to
throw the responsibility on the Sophists and rhetoricians. We may add
that even Polus is so far from being put in an odious light, that his
petulance abates under the Sokratic cross-examination; he is not
uncandid, does not obstinately resist conviction, and ends by confessing
himself refuted. The speaker in this dialogue who really professes
immoral doctrines, who denies that injustice is αἰσχρόν, and asserts
that right and wrong are matters of convention, is Kallikles: neither a
Sophist nor a rhetorician, but an active and ambitious political man,
who, though he frequents the rhetoricians, proclaims his contempt of the
Sophists, and represents a type of character doubtless frequent among
Grecian politicians, though we may doubt their having ever publicly
professed the principles they acted on.

The other rhetorical teacher shown up by Plato is Thrasymachus in the
Republic, who is presented as rude, overbearing, even insolent in his
manner of discussing, and who undoubtedly is made to profess, with a not
very material difference, essentially the same immoral doctrine as
Kallikles. He is accordingly confuted and put to shame; but even
Thrasymachus ends better than he began, and though he takes no share in
the long sequel of the dialogue, joins with others in pressing Sokrates
to go on, and parts with him on friendly terms. This single exhibition
of Thrasymachus, made, not by himself, but by Plato when he wants a
spokesman for an immoral doctrine, is the solitary case that can be
cited from Plato in support Edition: current; Page: [397] of the opinion
which imputes immoral teaching to the Sophists; and Thrasymachus was not
a Sophist, but a rhetorician.*

Nevertheless, it neither needs nor can be denied, not only that Plato
had an unfavourable opinion of the Sophists generally, but that his
writings contain much evidence of their being looked upon, in Athenian
society, with a widespread sentiment of aversion. Their unpopularity may
be accounted for, without supposing it to have been, in a moral point of
view, deserved. In the first place, the disapprobation was far from
being unanimous. Though the name Sophist was already a term of reproach,
it was also one of praise: Plato himself speaks of “the genuine
Sophistic art” (ἡ γένει γενναία σοϕιστική)† as a thing which he cannot
completely distinguish from something laudable, and asks, “Have we not,
in seeking for the Sophist, unexpectedly found the Philosopher?‡ In
another place, when speaking of the skilful adaptations of Creative
Power, he says that the gods are admirable Sophists. The term, when
applied to any one, was an insult or a compliment according to the
person who used it; like metaphysician, or political economist, or
Malthusian, in our own day. And this double tradition was prolonged into
the latest period of Grecian culture. It lasted even after the word
philosopher had come into use as the designation which all kinds of
speculative men took to themselves; when this name might have been
expected to engross all the favourable associations, leaving only the
unfavourable to the word sophist. In one of the dialogues of Lucian, who
was cotemporary with Marcus Aurelius, the sophist is identified with the
philosopher, and described as the chosen and professional inculcator and
guardian of virtue.§ Those who are chiefly brought forward by Plato as
Edition: current; Page: [398] thinking ill of the Sophists, are either
practical politicians, whose contempt for theorists is no rare or
abnormal phenomenon in any age, or elderly and respectable fathers of
families, who had passed through life with credit and success without
the acquirements which they now found the younger generation running
after. The character in Plato who exhibits the strongest example of
mingled hatred and contempt for the Sophists, is Anytus, in the Menon.
This man, a politician of influence and repute, no sooner hears them
mentioned than he bursts into a torrent of abuse, calling them people
whom it is madness to have anything to do with, and whose presence no
city ought to tolerate; though he admits, when questioned, that he has
never conversed with any of them, nor has any personal knowledge of what
they taught, but does not the less indignantly denounce them as
“corrupters of youth,”[*] the charge on which afterwards, in conjunction
with Melêtus, he indicted Sokrates, withcwhatc result we all know. It is
worth mentioning, that Xenophon relates, on the authority of Sokrates
himself, the origin of the offence which Anytus had taken against him:
it was because he criticized the education which Anytus was giving to
his son, saying that a man who sought for himself the greatest honours
of the state ought to have brought up this promising youth to a higher
occupation than his own business of a tanner.* This is probably a fair
example of the feeling which indisposed respectable elderly Athenians
towards “Sokrates the Sophist,”[†] and towards the other Sophists. When
the charge of corrupting youth comes to be particularized, it always
resolves itself into making them think themselves wiser than the laws,
and fail in proper respect to their fathers and their seniors. And this
is a true charge: only it ought to fall, not on the Sophists, but on
intellectual culture generally. Whatever encourages young men to think
for themselves, does lead them to criticize the laws of Edition:
current; Page: [399] their country—does shake their faith in the
infallibility of their fathers and their elders, and make them think
their own speculations preferable. It is beyond doubt that the teaching
of Sokrates, and of Plato after him, produced these effects in an
extraordinary degree. Accordingly, we learn from Xenophon that the
youths of rich families who frequented Sokrates, did so, for the most
part, against the severe disapprobation of their relatives.[*] In every
age and state of society, fathers and the elder citizens have been
suspicious and jealous of all freedom of thought and all intellectual
cultivation (not strictly professional) in their sons and juniors,
unless they can get it controlled and regulated by some civil or
ecclesiastical authority in which they have confidence. But it had not
occurred to Athenian legislators to have an established Sophistical
Church, or State Universities. The teaching of the Sophists was all on
the voluntary principle; and the dislike of it was of the same nature
with the outcry against “godless colleges,” or the objection of most of
our higher and middle classes to any schools but denominational ones.
They disapproved of any teaching, unless they could be certain that all
their own opinions would be taught. It mattered not that the instructors
taught no heresy; the mere fact that they accustomed the mind to ask
questions, and require other reasons than use and wont, sufficed at
Athens, as it does in most other places, to make the teaching dangerous
in the eyes of self-satisfied respectability. Accordingly,
respectability, as Plato himself tells us, looked with at least as evil
an eye on Philosophers as on Sophists. Sokrates, in the Apologia, speaks
of the reproach of atheism, of making the worse appear the better cause,
and so forth, as the charges always at hand to be flung at those who
philosophize; τὰ κατὰ πάντων τω̑ν ϕιλοσοϕούντων πρόχειρα ταυ̑τα.[†]
Xenophon also calls the teaching of an art of words “the common reproach
of the multitude against philosophers.”* There is nothing in all Plato
more impressive than his picture, in the Gorgias and the Republic, of
the solitary and despised position of the philosopher in every existing
society, and the universal impression against him, as at best an useless
person, but more frequently an eminently wicked one (παμπονήρους, κακοὺς
πα̑σαν κακίαν).‡ He takes pains to point out the causes which gave to
this unfavourable opinion of philosophers a colour of truth, and admits
that it was not unfrequently justified by the conduct of those who were
so called; which is more than he ever says of the Sophists.

Plato’s own dislike of the Sophists was probably quite as intense as
that to which he testifies on the part of the Athenian public: but was
it of the Edition: current; Page: [400] same nature? Did he regard them
as corruptors of youth? Not if the Sokrates of the Republic expresses
Plato’s opinions. In one of the most weighty passages of that majestic
dialogue, Sokrates is made to say—People fancy that it is Sophists and
such people that are corruptors of youth; but this is a mistake. The
real corruptor of the young is society itself; their families, their
associates, all whom they see and converse with, the applauses and
hootings of the public assembly, the sentences of the court of justice.
These are what pervert young men, by holding up to them a false standard
of good and evil, and giving an entirely wrong direction to their
desires. As for the Sophists, they merely repeat the people’s own
opinions.

Do you imagine [he asks], like the many, that young men are corrupted by
Sophists—that there are private Sophists who corrupt them in any degree
worth talking about (ὅτι καὶ ἄξιον λόγου)? Are not the very men who
assert this, themselves the greatest Sophists, educating and training in
the most thorough manner both young and old, men and women, to be such
as they wish them to be? Those fee-taking individuals whom they call
Sophists, and regard as their rivals, teach nothing but these very
opinions of the multitude, and call them wisdom.*

And it is these false opinions of the multitude, as he proceeds to show,
which corrupt so many minds originally well fitted for philosophy, and
divert them to the paths of vulgar ambition. If there is a class from
whom he deems the multitude to have imbibed these false opinions, and
whom he consequently makes accountable for them, it is the poets, who,
in the religion of Hellas, were also the theologians.

Why, then, is Plato so merciless in running down the Sophists? The
reasons are plain enough in many parts of his writings: let us look for
them where we may be sure of finding them, in the dialogue devoted to
defining what a Sophist is. The Sophistes is an elaborate investigation
into the Sophist’s nature and essence, and, besides its direct purpose,
is intended as an example of the most thorough mode of conducting such
investigations. From a succession of different points of view, Plato
arrives at several definitions of the Sophist, some of which want so
little of being complimentary, that he confesses a difficulty in
distinguishing the Sophist from the Dialectician. Others are
condemnatory, but the grounds of condemnation which emerge are limited
to two; the same which compose the definition by his pupil Aristotle, of
a Sophist in the unfavourable sense: χρηματιστὴς ἀπὸ ϕαινομένης σοϕίας
ἀλλ’ οὐκ οὔσης.[*] The first and principal topic of disparagement (which
recurs in almost every dialogue where they are mentioned) Edition:
current; Page: [401] is that they took money for their teaching. And
everything proves that whatever antipathy he had to the Sophists
specially, as distinguished from other influential classes in Greece,
was grounded on that circumstance alone. This will perhaps be hardly
credible to many readers. In modern times, when everybody takes pay for
everything (legislators and county magistrates alone excepted), and it
is thought quite natural and creditable that men should be paid in money
even for saving souls, it is difficult to realize the point of view from
which Plato and Sokrates looked on this subject. Sokrates, we are told
by Xenophon, compared those who sell their wisdom to those who sell
their caresses,* and maintained that both alike ought only to be given
in exchange for love. Nor is this inconsistent with the fact that Plato
certainly, and Sokrates probably, though they took no fees, accepted
presents from their admirers: for to minister to the needs of a friend
was a duty of friendship; and the Platonic Sokrates† expresses his whole
sentiment on the question by saying, that the teachers of any special
art may consistently and reasonably demand payment for their
instructions, because they profess to make people good artists or
artificers, not good men; but that it is the height of inconsistency in
a professed teacher of virtue to grumble because those whom he has
pretended to instruct do not pay him sufficiently, since his complaint
of their injustice is the clearest proof that the instruction has been
of no use.‡ Nor is it difficult to find arguments, tenable even from the
modern point of view, which might be, and have been, brought to prove
the mischief of erecting the commerce of ideas into a money-getting
trade. In the brilliant dialogue entitled Gorgias, in which the hardest
things are said that are to be found in all Plato both against the
sophistic and the rhetorical profession, he classes them as two branches
of one comprehensive, not art but knack, that of adulation (κολακεία).
They attain their purposes, he affirms, not by making people wiser or
better, but by conforming to their opinions, pandering to their existing
desires, and making them better pleased with themselves and with their
errors and vices than they were before.[*] And is not this the really
Edition: current; Page: [402] formidable temptation of all popular
teaching and all literature? necessarily aggravated when these are
practised for their pecuniary fruits. We may picture to ourselves Plato,
judging from this point of view the teachers of the present day.dAnd
established clergy, he might say, are directly bribed to profess an
existing set of opinions, whether they believe them or not, and however
remote they may be from truth. The ministers of every non-established
sect are no less bound by their pecuniary interest to preach, not what
is true, but what their flocks already believe. Of lawyers it is
unnecessary to speak, who must either give up their profession, or
accept a brief without scruple from what they know to be the wrong side.
Schoolmasters, and the teachers and governors of universities, must, on
every subject on which opinions differ, provide the teaching which will
be acceptable to those who can give them pupils, not that which is
really the best. Statesmen, he might say, have renounced even the
pretence that anything ought to be required from them but to give to the
public, not what is best for it, but what it wishes to have. The press,
especially the most influential part of it, the newspapers and
periodicals—by what incessant evidence does it prove that it considers
as its business to be of the same mind with the public; to court, assent
to, adulate, Public Opinion, and instead of disagreeable truths, ply it
with the things it likes toehear.e There is so much groundwork of
reality for a representation like this, that some in our own day draw
the same practical inference with Plato, and think there should be no
law of copyright, that writers may no longer be tempted to prepare
opinions for the market, and no one may write aught but what he feels
impelled to put forth from pure zeal for his convictions. We think this
opinion wrong, not because nothing can be said for it, but because there
is much more to be said on the opposite side. It is, however, a
substantially correct expression of Plato’s sentiments, and shows that
his bitterness against the Sophists for being paid teachers was far from
being the mere sentimentality which we might be apt to think it.

The other ground of disapproval of the Sophists which comes out in the
Sophistes, and wherever else Plato discusses them, is, that the
doctrines in which they dealt were apparent, not real wisdom; Opinion
only, and not Knowledge. Whoever is aware of what Plato meant by
knowledge, and of the attitude which he and his master assumed towards
what passed for such among their cotemporaries, will admit that what is
here said of the Sophists was true; but not truer of them than of all
other persons in that age. If there is one thing more than another which
Plato represents Sokrates as maintaining, it is that knowledge, on the
subjects most important to man, did not yet exist, though everybody was
living under the false persuasion of Edition: current; Page: [403]
possessing it. He, Sokrates, did not pretend to know anything, except
his own ignorance; but inasmuch as other people did not know even that,
Sokrates, who did, deserved the palm of wisdom assigned to him by the
Delphian Oracle. In the Apologia, which is either the real speech of
Sokrates, or Plato’s idealization of his life and character, he
represents himself as driven by a religious obligation to cross-examine
all men, and discover if any of them had attained that real knowledge
which he himself was conscious of not possessing. For this purpose, as
he says, he sought the conversation of those who seemed, or were
considered, wise; beginning with the politicians, all of whom he found
to be in a state of gross ignorance, and in general more profoundly so
in proportion to their reputation, but puffed up in the extreme by a
false opinion of their own knowledge. He next tested the poets, but
found that though they composed splendid things, doubtless by a divine
afflatus, they were unable to give any rational account of the works
which, or of the subjects on which, they composed. Last, he tried the
artificers, and these, he found, did possess real knowledge, each
concerning his special art; but fell into the error of imagining that
they knew other things besides, which false opinion put them on the
whole in a worse condition than his own conscious ignorance. It is
noticeable that he does not here mention the Sophists among those whom
he had cross-examined, and convicted of not knowing what they pretended
to know. It is evident, however, that one who had this opinion
concerning all the world, would come first and most into collision with
the teachers. Those who not only fancied that they knew what they knew
not, but professed to teach it, would be the very first persons whom it
would fall in his way to convict of ignorance; and this is the exact
position of Plato with regard to the Sophists. He attacks them not as
the perverters of society, but as marked representatives of society
itself, and compelled, by the law of their existence as its paid
instructors, to sum up in themselves all that is bad in its tendencies.

The enemy against whom Plato really fought, and the warfare against whom
was the incessant occupation of the greater part of his life and
writings, was not Sophistry, either in the ancient or the modern sense
of the term, but Commonplace. It was the acceptance of traditional
opinions and current sentiments as an ultimate fact; and bandying of the
abstract terms which express approbation and disapprobation, desire and
aversion, admiration and disgust, as if they had a meaning thoroughly
understood and universally assented to. The men of his day (like those
of ours) thought that they knew what Good and Evil, Just and Unjust,
Honourable and Shameful, were, because they could use the words glibly,
and affirm them of this and of that, in agreement with existing custom.
But what the property was, which these several instances possessed in
common, justifying the application Edition: current; Page: [404] of the
term, nobody had considered; neither the Sophists, nor the rhetoricians,
nor the statesmen, nor any of those who set themselves up or were set up
by others as wise. Yet whoever could not answer this question was
wandering in darkness; had no standard by which his judgments were
regulated, and which kept them consistent with one another; no rule
which he knew, and could stand by, for the guidance of his life. Not
knowing what Justice and Virtue are, it was impossible to be just and
virtuous; not knowing what Good is, we not only fail to reach it, but
are certain to embrace Evil instead. Such a condition, to any one
capable of thought, made life not worth having. The grand business of
human intellect ought to consist in subjecting these general terms to
the most rigorous scrutiny, and bringing to light the ideas that lie at
the bottom of them. Even if this cannot be done, and real knowledge be
attained, it is already no small benefit to expel the false opinion of
knowledge; to make men conscious of their ignorance of the things most
needful to be known, fill them with shame and uneasiness at their own
state, and rouse a pungent internal stimulus, summoning up all their
mental energies to attack these greatest of all problems, and never rest
until, as far as possible, the true solutions are reached. This is
Plato’s notion of the condition of the human mind in his time, and of
what philosophy could do to help it; and any one who does not think the
description applicable, with slight modifications, to the majority even
of educated minds in our own and in all times known to us, certainly has
not brought either the teachers or the practical men of any time to the
Platonic test.*

The sole means by which, in Plato’s opinion, the minds of menfcanf be
delivered from this intolerable state, and put in the way of obtaining
the real knowledge which has power to make them wise and virtuous, is
what he terms Dialectics; and the philosopher, as conceived by him, is
almost synonymous with the Dialectician. What Plato understood by this
name consisted of two parts. One is, the testing every opinion by a
negative scrutiny, eliciting every objection or difficulty that could be
raised against it, and demanding, before it was adopted, that they
should be successfully Edition: current; Page: [405] met. This could
only be done effectually by way of oral discussion; pressing the
respondent by questions, to which he was generally unable to make
replies that were not in contradiction either to admitted fact, or to
his own original hypothesis. This cross-examination is the Sokratic
Elenchus; which, wielded by a master such as Sokrates was, and as we can
ourselves appreciate in Plato, no mere appearance of knowledge without
the reality was able to resist. Its pressure was certain, in an honest
mind, to dissipate the false opinion of knowledge, and make the confuted
respondent sensible of his own ignorance, while it at once helped and
stimulated him to the mental effort by which alone that ignorance could
be exchanged for knowledge. Dialectics, thus understood, is one branch
of an art which is a main portion of the Art of Living—that of not
believing except on sufficient evidence; its function being that of
compelling a man to put his belief into precise terms, and take a
defensible position against all the objections that can be made to it.
The other, or positive arm of Plato’s dialectics, of which he and
Sokrates may be regarded as the originators, is the direct search for
the common feature of things that are classed together, or, in other
words, for the meaning of the class-name. It comprehends the logical
processes of Definition and Division or Classification; the theory and
systematic employment of which were a new thing in Plato’s day: indeed
Aristotle says that the former of the operations was first introduced by
Sokrates.[*] They are indissolubly connected, Division being, as Plato
inculcates, the only road to Definition. To find what a thing is, it is
necessary to set out from Being in general, or from some large and known
Kind which includes the thing sought—to dismember the kind into its
component parts, and these into others, each division being, if
possible, only into two members (an anticipation of Ramus and Bentham),
marking at each stage the distinctive feature which differentiates one
member from the other. By the time we have divided down to the thing of
which we are in quest, we have remarked its points of agreement with all
the things to which it is allied, and the points that constitute its
differences from them; and are thus enabled to produce a definition of
it, which is a compendium of its whole nature. This mode of arriving at
a definition is elaborately exemplified, first on an insignificant
subject, then on a great and difficult one, in the Sophistes and
Politikos; two of the most important of the Platonic dialogues, because
in both of them the conception of this part of the process of
philosophizing is purely Baconian, unincumbered by the ontological
theory which Plato in other writings superinduces on his pure logic.*
Without this theory, however, a Edition: current; Page: [406] very
insufficient conception would be formed of the Platonic philosophy. The
bond of union among the particulars comprised in a class, as understood
by Plato, is not a mental Concept, framed by abstraction, and having no
existence outside the mind, but a Form or Idea, existing by itself,
belonging to another world than ours—with which Form or Idea, concrete
objects have a communion or participation of nature, and in the likeness
of which (though a very imperfect likeness) they have been made. When
this mode of conceiving the process of generalization had been received
into Plato’s mind, he was led to think that the Ideas were the real
existences, which were alone permanent, alone the object of knowledge.
Individual objects, if they could be said to be knowable at all, were
only knowable through the Ideas, which, therefore, it was the
characteristic function of the philosopher to cognise; thus exalting the
philosopher to a region above nature and the earth, and making him of
kin to the gods, who, being the possessors of supreme wisdom, must live
in the perpetual contemplation of these glorious and superterrene
existences. We have here reached the mystical and poetical side of
Plato’s philosophy; and the dialectic process being the only road by
which an earthly nature can approach these divine essences (for he by no
meansgregardedg their apprehension as intuitive), we begin to understand
how that process acquires the poetical and religious halo which
surrounds it in his mind; how the dialectician becomes a kind of divine
person—the nearest approach possible for man to the celestial nature.

The real merits, however, of the Platonic dialectics are not dependent
on this religious and metaphysical superstructure; and before we follow
Plato farther on that slippery ground, we must dwell a little on the
debt mankind owe to him for this, incomparably his greatest gift.

The larger half of the Platonic compositions is directly devoted to the
exemplification and application of the dialectic art; the investigation,
in conversation between two persons, of the definition of some term in
general use, connected with emotional sentiments and practical impulses
and restraints. Sometimes the inquiry takes the shape of confutation of
an opinion maintained by some admired teacher, or self-confident
dogmatist: sometimes the interlocutor is a friend or companion, usually
an ingenuous youth, who is encouraged to attempt a definition, and as
the definitions he hazards are successively shown to be insufficient,
looks out for another, free from the particular fault which has been
pointed out. An idea of the variety of topics embraced by these
inquiries may be conveyed to those unacquainted with Plato, by the
following catalogue:

_Euthyphron._
—What is Holiness?
_Laches._
—What is Courage?
_Charmides._
—What is Temperance (or self-restraint, or moderation, or orderliness,
or sobriety)?
_Lysis._
—What is Friendship (or affection, or liking, or attachment, or
attraction, or preference)? Or rather, what is the natural object of
this sentiment?
_Hippias Major._
—What is the Beautiful (or the Honourable, or the Fine, or the
Admirable)?
_Erastæ._
—What is Philosophy?
_Hipparchus._
—What is τὸ ϕιλοκερδές (meanness, sordidness, graspingness, greed of
gain)?
_Minos._
—What is a Law?
_Menon._
—What is Virtue?
_Theætetus._
—What is Knowledge?
_Sophistes._
—What is a Sophist?
_Politikos._
—What is a Statesman?

All these dialogues have for their sole object the investigation of
Definitions, either in the way of confutation or of simple search. If we
add those of which an important part is directed to this purpose, though
the dialogue has other objects besides, we include the four greatest
masterpieces of Plato’s genius:

Protagoras.—A manifold and magnificent display of the Sokratic and
Platonic mind, a great part of which consists of an inquiry into the
definitions of the cardinal virtues, and especially of Courage.

Phædrus.—Equally multifarious; part of which is a discussion respecting
the nature and definition of Rhetoric.

Gorgias.—What is Rhetoric? With this inquiry the dialogue sets out, but
leads through it into an ethical controversy on the superiority of the
just over the unjust life.

Republic.—The inquiry, What is Justice? is the starting point of this
great work, which widens out into a complete treatise on the Platonic
ethics, and on the constitution of a perfect commonwealth.

A series of investigations worthy to be attributed to the philosopher
who, as we hear from Xenophon, “never ceased considering, along with his
companions, what each existing thing is,” being of opinion “that those
who know what each thing is, are able to exhibit it to other people; but
when men know it not, it is no wonder that they themselves go astray,
and mislead others.”*

In casting our eyes over this list, we are forcibly reminded what a
curious thing Mixed Modes are; if we may venture to borrow from the
Lockian Edition: current; Page: [408] psychology a phrase which has
fallen into undeserved disuse, signifying those complex ideas which the
mind makes up for itself, not by directly copying an original in nature,
but by combination of elements more or less arbitrarily selected from
experience. Of this kind are the various concepts connected with praise
and blame, which, being mostly compounded of elements having little to
hold them together except a common emotion, are differently composed in
different ages and countries, and the words which represent them in one
language have no synonyms in another. We found it impossible to express
the subjects of several of Plato’s dialogues in English, except by
heaping together a number of names, no one of which is an exact
equivalent of the Greek word, and which even in combination are only an
approximate expression of the same collection of attributes. The subject
of the Lysis is ϕιλία, translated Friendship; and the inquiry into the
nature of ϕιλία has to give an account of friendship; but it has also to
give an account of a man’s ϕιλία for horses, and dogs, and wine, of the
ϕιλία of a sick body for health and medicine, that of a philosopher for
wisdom, even the imaginary attraction of Dry for Moist, Cold for Hot,
Bitter for Sweet, Empty for Full, and contraries in general for one
another. Σωϕροσύνη, the subject of the Charmides, is one of the most
difficult words to translate in the whole Greek language. The common
rendering, Temperance, corresponds to a part of the meaning, but is
ridiculously inadequate to the whole. Continence, Modesty, Moderation,
are all short of thehmark. Self-Restrainth and Self-Control are better,
but imply the coercion of the character by the will, while what is
required is rather a character not needing coercion. There is also in
the Greek word an implied idea of order, of measure, and, as may be seen
from this very dialogue, of deliberateness, which are wanting in the
nearest English equivalents. Unobtrusiveness, too, is an essential part
of the concept; and there is a connotation besides of Judgment or
Intelligence (let us say Reasonableness); otherwise Plato could not, as
he does in the Protagoras, found an apparent argument on the antithesis
between σωϕροσύνη and ἀϕροσύνη.[*] Sobriety, a word used several times
in this connexion by Mr. Grote, perhaps comes nearest to the Greek word
in its variety of applications; but even this hardly admits of being
substituted for it in discourse, without a perpetual running comment. A
still more illustrative case, interesting as an example of the relation
between national language and national character, is the Greek
employment of the words which we translate by Beautiful and Ugly: καλόν
and αἰσχρόν. These terms, derived from purely physical characteristics,
and never ceasing to Edition: current; Page: [409] carry that meaning,
became the symbols, both in speculation and in daily life, of the
æsthetic or artistic view of human actions and qualities, as
distinguished from the useful and the simply dutiful; an aspect
prominent, and even predominant, in the susceptible Grecian mind, but
which, to our exclusively practical turn of thought, confirmed by
monachism and puritanism, is scarcely intelligible, and our translators
bungle with their “honourable” and “shameful” in a vain attempt to
express the complicated sentiment of the Greeks on matters of conduct
and character, or to understand what their writers meant. The French,
whose ethical sentiment retains more of the æsthetic element, sometimes
indeed out of due proportion to the prudential and the dutiful, realize
better the Hellenic feeling, and can often, even in moral discussion,
translate τὸ καλόν by “le beau;” though there is no similar correlation
of “le laid” with αἰσχρόν.*

In spite, however, of these divergences between Plato’s world and our
own in the composition of the complex ideas to which emotions are
attached, whoever has a due value for the Method will often learn as
much from these cases, as from the more frequent ones in which the
subject of inquiry is a Mixed Mode identical or very similar to one
familiar to ourselves; as Virtue, Justice, Courage, Knowledge, Law.

In many of these investigations, the person questioned does not at first
exactly know what is expected from him, and instead of a genuine
definition, replies by specimens of particular things commonly included
under the name; the pretentious and practised teacher Hippias, as
represented in the dialogue, being as unfamiliar with the sort of
investigation intended, and more inexpert and clumsy when he attempts
it, than the respectable and competent man of action Laches, the opulent
Thessalian patrician Menon, or the youth Theætetus. Sokrates labours, by
a profusion of illustrative examples (showing how little familiar the
notion then was), to make them understand that what is wanted is not any
particular cases of the beautiful, or of virtue, or of knowledge, but
what Beauty, or Virtue, or Knowledge, in themselves are. The respondent
is then encouraged, or, if in an antagonistic position, compelled, to
point out some feature or circumstance which is always present along
with the notion or predicate into the meaning of which they are
inquiring. The part of Sokrates is, to show Edition: current; Page:
[410] either that this feature or circumstance is not present in all the
cases, or, more frequently, that it is present in many more than the
cases, to which the word is applicable; thus obliging the respondent
either to withdraw his definition and try another, or to limit the first
by some circumstance, intended to exclude the particulars which had been
unguardedly left within the boundary. Many definitions are tried, and
shown to be untenable, and the dialogue often concludes without any
result but the confession of ignorance. Even when one of the definitions
examined seems to be accepted in one dialogue, it is often contested,
and apparently refuted, in another; so that the result, on the whole, is
rather one of method than of doctrine; though striking fragments of
truth come to the surface, in the general turning up of the subject
which the process involves. The confutations, too, though of marvellous
ingenuity, are frequently, to us, obvious fallacies. Yet the process is
the true and only mode of acquiring abstract notions which are both
clear, and correspond to points of identity among real facts; and the
manifold and masterly exemplification of it in the Platonic dialogues is
a discipline in precise thinking, to which there is even now nothing
simile aut secundum in philosophy. To suppose that dialectic training
only trains dialecticians, is great ignorance of its power and virtue.
Such training is an indispensable education for dogmatic thinkers: and
it is quite in the course of nature that Plato should have been the
master of Aristotle. But the many first-rate minds which have owed much
of their clearness and vigour to the Platonic dialectic, have shown what
it had done for them by the fruits it brought forth in themselves,
rather than by creating any fresh models of it. The dialogues,
therefore, are the still unrivalled types of the dialectic process; made
captivating by all the grace and felicity of execution which gave to the
author the title of the Attic Bee; and afford an example, once in all
literature, of the union between an eminent genius for philosophy and
the most consummate skill and feeling of the artist.

Much, however, as the modern world owes to the Platonic dialectics, it
is seldom duly sensible of the obligation. The testing and
cross-examining process is never popular.

In the natural process of growth in the human mind, belief does not
follow proof, but springs up apart from and independent of it; an
immature intelligence believes first, and proves (if indeed it ever
seeks proof) afterwards. This mental tendency is further confirmed by
the pressure and authority of King Nomos; who is peremptory in exacting
belief, but neither furnishes nor requires proof. The community,
themselves deeply persuaded, will not hear with calmness the voice of a
solitary reasoner, adverse to opinions thus established; nor do they
like to be required to explain, analyse, or reconcile those opinions.
They disapprove especially that dialectic debate which gives free play
and efficacious prominence to the negative arm.*

Edition: current; Page: [411]
“Nothing can be more repugnant to an ordinary mind than the thorough
sifting of deep-seated, long familiarized notions.”* Scarcely any modern
would endure to submit himself to the Sokratic interrogation, which, to
Plato’s apprehension, was so emphatically the only sufficient Elenchus
or test, that he entertained a very poor opinion of the value either of
long speeches, or of written discourse, where the discourser was not at
hand to be questioned and to question—διδόναι καὶ δέχεσθαι λόγον.[*]
Even such approach to the Sokratic method as written composition admits
of, the confutation of adversaries behind their backs, is seldom
regarded with much favour; even those who agree with the writer caring
little for it, beyond what pleasure they may take in seeing their
opponents humiliated. For themselves, they are content to be convinced
by their own reasons, without troubling themselves about
counter-arguments which they are sure must be fallacious. Yet truth, in
everything but mathematics, is not a single but a double question; not
what can be said for an opinion, but whether more can be said for it
than against it. There is no knowledge, and no assurance of right
belief, but with him who can both confute the opposite opinion, and
successfully defend his own against confutation. But this, the principal
lesson of Plato’s writings, the world and many of its admired teachers
have very imperfectly learned. We have to thank our free Parliament, and
the publicity of our courts of justice, for whatever feeling we have of
the value of debate. The Athenians, who were incessantly engaged in
hearing both sides of every deliberative and judicial question, had a
far stronger sense of it.

The other, or positive half of the Platonic dialectic, is equally far
from being appreciated; that, namely, whereby the vague generalities
which serve as the standard of censure or applause in common discourse,
are put on the logical rack, and compelled to declare what definite
signification lies in them. This twofold obligation, to be able to
maintain our opinions against the criticism of opponents and refute
theirs, and never to use a term in serious discourse without a precise
meaning, has always been odious to the classes who compose nearly the
whole of mankind; dogmatists of all persuasions, and merely practical
people. Hence it is that human intellect improves so slowly, and, even
in acquiring more and more of the results of wisdom, grows so little
wiser. In things that depend on natural sagacity, which is about equally
abundant at all times, we are not inferior to our forefathers; in
knowledge of observed facts we are far beyond them; but we cast off
particular errors without extirpating the causes of error; the Idols of
the Tribe, and even of the Den, infest us almost as much as formerly;[†]
the Edition: current; Page: [412] discipline which purges the intellect
itself,iprotectingi it from false generalization, inconclusive
inference, and simple nonsense, on subjects which it imperfectly knows,
is still absent from all but a few minds. We have been disabused of many
false and pernicious opinions by the evidence of fact, but not by
correcting the mental habits whichjengenderj them; and we are almost as
ready as ever to receive new errors, when our senses and memory do not
supply us with truths which those particular erroneous opinions would
contradict.

It is singular that Plato himself did not fully profit by the principal
lesson of his own teaching. This is one of the inconsistencies by which
he is such a puzzle to posterity. No one can read many of the works of
Plato, and doubt that he had positive opinions. But he does not bring
his own opinions to the test which he applies to others. “It depends on
the actual argumentative purpose which Plato has in hand, whether he
chooses to multiply objections and give them effect, or to ignore them
altogether.”* “The affirmative Sokrates only stands his ground because
no negative Sokrates is allowed to attack him.”† Or, what is worse,
Plato applies the test, and disregards its indications; states clearly
and strongly the objections to the opinion he favours, and goeskonk his
way as if they did not exist. If there is a doctrine which is the guide
of his deepest speculations, which he invests with all the plausibility
that his wonderful power of illustration can give, and clothes in the
most brilliant colours of his poetic imagination, it is the theory of
Self-Existent Ideas—the essential groundwork of some of his grandest
dialogues, especially the Phædrus, the Phædon, and an important portion
of the Republic. Yet there is in his writings no specimen of logical
confutation more remarkable than that by which Parmenides, in the
dialogue so called, overthrows this very doctrine, put into the mouth of
the youthful Sokrates. Some of the Platonic critics consequently decide
the Parmenides not to be a work of Plato, but one directed against
Plato, by a disciple of the Eleatic school; forgetting that Parmenides,
in the dialogue, gives an equally peremptory refutation of his own
principal doctrine, the Unity of Being, and moreover winds up his
refutation of the theory of Ideas by saying that, liable as it is to
these great difficulties, philosophy and dialectics would be impossible
unless it were admitted.‡ One would expect that so important a Edition:
current; Page: [413] theory would not be left in this predicament,
suspended between opposite reasons deemed equally irresistible. We
should have supposed that the great master of dialectics, since he
accepted the doctrine, would have held himself bound to refute its
seeming refutation. Yet he never does this, and, we venture to think,
could not have done it. The objections are repeated, in a more abridged
form, in the Philebus, and are equally left unanswered, Sokrates merely
remarking, that the subject will probably always continue to be a theme
for the ingenuity of young dialecticians.* The dogmatic Plato seems a
different person from the elenctic Plato:

The two currents of his speculation, the affirmative and the negative,
are distinct and independent of each other. Where the affirmative is
especially present (as in Timæus) the negative altogether disappears.
Timæus is made to proclaim the most sweeping theories, not one of which
the real Sokrates would have suffered to pass without abundant
cross-examination; but the Platonic Sokrates hears them with respectful
silence, and commends afterwards. When Plato comes forward to affirm,
his dogmas are altogether à priori; they enunciate preconceptions or
hypotheses, which derive their hold upon his belief not from any
aptitude for solving the objections which he has raised, but from deep
and solemn sentiment of some kind or other—religious, ethical,
æsthetical, poetical, &c., the worship of numerical symmetry or
exactness, &c. The dogmas are enunciations of some grand sentiment of
the divine, good, just, beautiful, symmetrical, &c., which Plato follows
out into corollaries. But this is a process of itself; and while he is
performing it, the doubts previously raised are not called up to be
solved, but are forgotten or kept out of sight.†

Plato was sceptic, dogmatist, religious mystic and inquisitor,
mathematician, philosopher, poet (erotic as well as satirical), rhetor,
artist, all in one, or, at least, all in succession, throughout the
fifty years of his philosophical life. At one time his exuberant
dialectical impulse claims satisfaction, manifesting itself in a string
of ingenious doubts and unsolved contradictions; at another time he is
full of theological antipathy against those who libel Helios and Selênê,
or who deny the universal providence of the gods: here we have
unqualified confessions of ignorance, and protestations against the
false persuasion of knowledge, as alike wide-spread and deplorable;
there we find a description of the process of building up the Kosmos
from the beginning, as if the author had been privy to the inmost
purposes of the Demiurgus. In one dialogue the erotic fever is in the
ascendant, distributed between beautiful youths and philosophical
concepts, and confounded with a religious inspiration and furor which
supersedes and transcends human sobriety (Phædrus); in another, all
vehement impulses of the soul are stigmatized and repudiated, no
honourable scope being left for anything but the calm and passionless
Nous (Philêbus, Phædon). Satire is exchanged for dithyramb and mythe,
and one ethical point of view for another (Protagoras, Gorgias). The
all-sufficient dramatizing power of the master gives full effect to each
of these multifarious tendencies. On the Edition: current; Page: [414]
whole—to use a comparison of Plato himself—the Platonic sum total
somewhat resembles those fanciful combinations of animals imagined in
the Hellenic mythology—an aggregate of distinct and disparate
individuals, which look like one because they are packed in the same
external wrapper.*

The most important, though not the whole, of these varieties of tone and
sentiment, seem to us to be explained by the philosopher’s advance in
years, and growth in positive convictions. The first alone will account
for much. There needs little argument to prove that the warfare against
the intenser pleasures, and condemnation of all mental perturbations, of
the Philebus, the Leges, and even the Republic, belong to a later time
of life than the amatory enthusiasm of the Phædrus and the Symposion.
Again, the works which bear the strongest marks of having been written
in Plato’s later years, show a great modification in his estimation of
the Elenctic process. He had apparently met the not unfrequent fate of
great reformers, so strikingly exemplified in the career of Luther, who,
precisely because he had succeeded beyond all reasonable expectation in
his original purpose, had to expend his principal energies during the
latter part of his life in driving back followers who had outrun their
leader. In the dialogues of mere Search, which were probably written by
Plato while the influence of Sokrates over his mind was still
predominant, there is nothing he oftener repeats, in the person of his
hero, than that the mere awakening of a sense of ignorance, the mere
destruction of the false persuasion of knowledge which is universal
among mankind, is in itself, though nothing further come of it, a highly
valuable result of Dialectics. But as he advanced in life, and acquired
a persuasion of knowledge of his own; when, to use a metaphor of Mr.
Grote’s, he ceased to be leader of opposition, and passed over to the
ministerial benches, he came to think that the Sokratic
cross-examination is a dangerous edge-tool. Already in the Republic we
find him dwelling on the mischiefs of a purely negative state of mind,
and complaining that Dialectics are placed too early in the course of
education, and are taken up by “immature youths, who abuse the licence
of interrogation, find all their home-grown opinions uncertain, and end
by losing all positive convictions.”† In the Platonic commonwealth, this
pursuit only commences at the age of thirty, in order that Plato’s own
dogmatic opinions may have a long start before being exposed to the
dangers of the elenctic test. Dialectic, with its logical
cross-examination, is still, however, the grand instrument of
philosophizing, and those trained in it are alone considered fit to
rule. But as Plato advanced still further in years and in dogmatism, he
seems to have lost his relish and value for Dialectic altogether. In his
second imaginary commonwealth—that of the Leges—it is no longer
mentioned; it forms no Edition: current; Page: [415] part of the
education either of the rulers or of the ruled, but in lieu of it is
substituted a rigid and immutable orthodoxy of Plato’s own making, any
disloyalty to which, or any dream of trying it by the Elenchus, is
repressed with Torquemada-like severity. With regard to his omission to
fortify his opinions in his own mind, against the difficulties raised by
himself, our suspicion is, that he had come to despair of the efficacy
of the dialectic process as a means of discriminating truth; that his
inability to solve his own objections had brought him to the persuasion
that objections insoluble by dialectics could be made against all
truths; and, the ethical and political tendencies of his mind becoming
predominant over the purely speculative, he came to think that the
doctrines which had the best ethical tendency should be taught, with
little or no regard to whether they could be proved true, and even at
the risk of their being false.

There are thus, independently of minor discrepancies, two complete
Platos in Plato—the Sokratist and the Dogmatist—of whom the former is by
far the more valuable to mankind, but the latter has obtained from them
much the greater honour. And no wonder; for the one was capable of being
a useful prop to many a man’s moral and religious dogmas, while the
other could only clear and invigorate the human understanding.

There is, indeed, ample justification for the homage which all
cultivated ages have rendered to Plato simply as a moralist—as one of
the most powerful masters of virtue who have appeared among mankind.
Amid all his changes, there is one thing to which he is ever
constant—the transcendent worth of virtue and wisdom (which he
invariably identifies), and the infinitely superior eligibility of the
just life, even if calumniated and persecuted, over the unjust, however
honoured by men, and by whatever power and grandeur surrounded. And what
he thus feels, no one ever had a power superior to his of making felt by
his readers. It is this element which completes in him the character of
a Great Teacher. Others can instruct, but Plato is of those who form
great men, by the combination of moral enthusiasm and logical
discipline. “Aristotle,” says Mr. Grote, “in one of his lost dialogues,
made honourable mention of a Corinthian cultivator, who in reading the
Platonic Gorgias, was smitten with such vehement admiration, that he
abandoned his fields and his vines, came to Athens forthwith, and
committed himself to the tuition of Plato.”* It was not, we may be
assured, by its arguments, that the Gorgias produced this striking
manifestation of psychagogic efficacy; for they are nearly all of them
fallacies, and could not have resisted the first touch of the
cross-examining Elenchus, so unsparingly applied to their impugners.
This great dialogue, full of just thoughts and fine observations on
human nature, is, in mere argument, one of the Edition: current; Page:
[416] weakest of Plato’s works. It is not by its logic, but by its ἠ̑θος,
that it produces its effects; not by instructing the understanding, but
by working on the feelings and imagination. Nor is this strange; for the
disinterested love of virtue is an affair of feeling. It is impossible
to prove to any one Plato’s thesis, that justice is supreme happiness,
unless he can be made to feel it as such. The external inducements which
recommend it he may be taught to appreciate; the favourable regards and
good offices of other people, and the rewards of another life. These
considerations, however, though Plato has recourse to them in other
places, are not available in the Gorgias. The posthumous recompense he
only ventures to introduce in the form of a mythe; and the earthly one
is opposed to the whole scheme of the dialogue, which represents the
virtuous and wise man as, in every existing society, a solitary being,
misjudged, persecuted, and having no more chance with the Many against
their adulators, than (to use Plato’s comparison)[*] a physician would
have, if indicted before a jury of children by a confectioner for giving
them nauseous drugs instead of delicious sweetmeats. It is precisely
this picture of the moral hero, still tenax propositi[†] against the
hostility and contempt of the world, which makes the splendour and power
of the Gorgias. The Sokrates of the dialogue makes us feel all other
evils to be more tolerable than injustice in the soul, not by proving
it, but by the sympathy he calls forth with his own intense feeling of
it. He inspires heroism, because he shows himself a hero. And his
failures in logic do not prevent the step marked by the Gorgias from
being one of the greatest ever made in moral culture—the cultivation of
a disinterested preference of duty for its own sake, as a higher state
than that of sacrificing selfish preferences to a more distant
self-interest.

In the Republic, the excellence and inherent felicity of the just life
are as impressively insisted on, and enforced by arguments of greater
substance. But, as Mr. Grote justly remarks, those arguments, even if
conclusive, are addressed to the wrong point; for the life they suppose
is not that of the simply just man, but of the philosopher. They are not
applicable to the typical just man—to such a person as Aristeides, who
is no dialectician, soars to no speculative heights, and is no nearer
than other people to a vision of the Self-Existent Ideas, but who, at
every personal sacrifice, persistently acts up to the rules of virtue
acknowledged by the worthiest of his countrymen. It is not obvious what
place there was for Aristeides in the Platonic theory of virtue, nor how
he was to be adjusted to the doctrine of Plato and of the historical
Sokrates, that virtue is a branch of knowledge, and that no one is
unjust willingly. Aristeides probably had the same notions of justice as
his cotemporaries, and could as little as any of them Edition: current;
Page: [417] have answered Sokratic interrogatories by a definition of it
which would have been proof against all objections. The conformity of
his will to it, the never being unjust willingly, was probably the chief
moral difference between him and ordinary men. Plato might indeed have
said that Aristeides had the most indispensable point of knowledge—he
knew that the just man must be the happiest. But Aristeides was not the
kind of man of whom Plato has, more or less successfully, proved this;
and the true Platonic doctrine is that it is impossible to be just,
without knowing (in the high Platonic meaning of knowledge) what justice
is.*

When we try Plato, as a moralist, by this test of his own; when, from
the inspired apostle of virtue, we pass to the philosophic teacher of
it, and ask for his criterion of virtue, we find it different in
different works. In the Protagoras, it is completely utilitarian, in all
that is stigmatized by some people as “low” and “degrading;” though
justly condemned by Mr. Grote from the utilitarian point of view,
because destitute of the unselfish element.[*] Edition: current; Page:
[418] According to the Sokrates of the Protagoras, there is nothing good
as an end except pleasure and the absence of pain; all other good things
are but means to these. Virtue is an affair of calculation, and the sole
elements of the calculation are pains and pleasures. But the elements
computed are the agent’s own pains and pleasures, omitting those of
other people, and of mankind. The system is thus a selfish one; though
only theoreticallylsol, since its propounder would have held fast to the
doctrine that the just is the only happy life, i.e. (according to the
theory of this dialogue) the one which affords to the agent himself the
greatest excess of pleasure over pain. The standard of the Protagoras
agrees with that of the historical Sokrates, who throughout the
Memorabilia inculcates the ordinary duties of life on hedonistic
grounds, and recommends them by the ordinary hedonistic inducements, the
good opinion and praise of fellow-citizens, reciprocity of good
treatment, and the favour of benevolent deities. Even in the Leges,
Plato affirms that people will never be persuaded to prefer virtue
unless convinced of its being the path of greatest pleasure, and that
whether it is so or not (though he fully believes that it is), they must
not only be taught to believe this, but no approach to a doubt of it
must be tolerated within the country. The Sokrates of the Gorgias,
however, dissents both from the Sokrates of the Protagoras and from the
real Sokrates. Good is, with him, no longer synonymous with Pleasurable,
nor Evil with Painful. To constitute anything a Good, it must be either
pleasurable or beneficial (ὠϕέλιμον), and Justice belongs to the
category of Beneficial; but beneficial to what end, is not explained,
except that the end certainly is not Pleasure. Justice is assimilated to
the health of the soul, injustice to a disease: and since the health of
the body is its greatest good, and disease its greatest evil, the same
estimate is extended by analogy to the mind. There is no attempt, in the
Gorgias, to define Justice. In the Republic, which has this definition
for its express purpose, and travels through the whole process of
constructing an ideal commonwealth to arrive at it, the result is
brought out, that Justice is synonymous with the complete supremacy of
Reason in the soul. The human mind is analysed into the celebrated three
elements, Reason, Spirit or Passion (τὸ θυμοειδές, another troublesome
Mixed Mode) and Appetite. The just mind is that in which each of the
three keeps its proper place; in which Reason governs, Passion makes
itself the aid and instrument of Reason, and the two combined keep
Appetite in a state of willing subjection. In the Philebus, which is
professedly De Bono (or rather De Summo Bono), the subject is more
discriminatingly scrutinized. After a long discussion, in which those
who uphold Pleasure, and those who contend for wisdom or intelligence
(ϕρόνησις), as the ultimate end, are both confuted; Edition: current;
Page: [419] Good, or that which is worthy of being desired, is found to
consist of five things, desirable in unequal degrees. We shall not quote
the whole list, as, from the vagueness of some of the conceptions, and
the extremely abstract nature of the phraseology, even Mr. Grote
confesses how hard it is to be understood.[*] The first four, however,
have exclusive reference to the rational elements of the mind, while the
fifth, placed far below the others, consists of the few pleasures which
are gentle and unmixed with pain; all others, and especially the
intenser pleasures, having been eliminated, as belonging to a
distempered mental condition. All these theories lay themselves open to
Mr. Grote’s criticism, by defining virtue with reference to the good
only of the agent himself; even justice, pre-eminently the social
virtue, being resolved into the supremacy of reason within our own
minds: in disregard of the fact that the idea and sentiment of virtue
have their foundation not exclusively in the self-regarding, but also,
and even more directly, in the social feelings: a truth first fully
accepted by the Stoics, who have the glory of being the earliest
thinkers who grounded the obligation of morals on the brotherhood, the
συγγένεια, of the whole human race. The grand defect of Plato’s ethical
conceptions (excellently discussed in Mr. Grote’s remarks on the
Republic) was in overlooking, what was completely seized by
Aristotle—that the essential part of the virtue of justice is the
recognition and observance of the rights of other people.*

It is noticeable that even in the Republic, the governing and
controlling principle of the mind, which we have translated Reason, and
whose unresisted authority constitutes the essence of virtue, is τὸ
λογιστικόν—literally the calculating principle (λογιστική being used by
Plato himself, in the Gorgias, to denote a portion of Arithmetic).[†]
This is the very doctrine of the Protagoras, except that the elements to
be calculated are different. And, through the whole series of the
dialogues, a Measuring Art, μετρητικὴ τέχνη, as a means of
distinguishing the truth of things from their superficial appearance, is
everywhere desiderated as the great requisite both of wisdom and of
virtue. When, however, the test of Pain and Pleasure Edition: current;
Page: [420] is abandoned, no other elements are shown to us which the
Measuring Art is to be employed to measure. Of course it has to measure
our minds and actions themselves; but we measure anything, to make it
conform to, or agree with, the dimensions of something else; and Plato
does not tell us of what else. Our life is to be regulated, but we are
not told what it is to be regulated by. The measuring process is
supposed to have a virtue in itself. The analogy used is that of the
untrue magnitudes and proportions of objects as seen by the eye, and
their rectification by measurement; Plato overlooking that it is not the
act of measuring which rectifies them, but the perceptions of touch
which the measuring only ascertains. The idea of Measure as a good in
itself, independent of any end beyond it, seems to have grown upon Plato
as he advanced in life. Mere conformity to a fixed rule, especially if
accompanied by regularity of numerical proportion, became his principal
standard of excellence. This answered to a powerful sentiment in the
Hellenic mind, which, combining with vehement impulses a high sense of
personal dignity, demanded harmonious proportion in mind and deportment
as much as in architecture, and to which anything inordinate, dissonant,
unrhythmical, even in voice or demeanour, was not only distasteful,* but
seemed an indication of an ill-regulated mind; as it is expressly
affirmed to be by Plato in the Republic.† In Plato’s own mind we know
that Measure and Regularity were the very footprints of divinity; that
they, and only they, were the marks of design in the Kosmos, and where
they ceased, the share of Deity ended too; the Kosmos altogether being
but a compromise with ἀνάγκη or Necessity; which, by an inversion of the
modern idea, stood for the capricious portion of the agencies in
Nature—those in which the same consequent did not invariably follow the
same antecedent.‡ In the Philebus, Measure and the Measured, μέτρον καὶ
τὸ μέτριον καίριον,[*] stand as the first elements of Good, even
Edition: current; Page: [421] Intelligence being only the third, and
Pleasure (limited to the unexciting pleasures) the fifth and hindmost.
In Plato’s later speculations, from the Republic to the Epinomis, the
sciences of measure and proportion, Arithmetic, Geometry, and Astronomy,
gradually take the place of Dialectics as the proper education of a
ruler and philosopher. We learn from Aristotle that this was even more
emphatically the case in his lectures, during the latter years of his
life. Those which he delivered on the Ipsum Bonum, or Idea of Good, to
the surprise of hearers, turned on transcendental properties of numbers.
Number was resolved into two elementary factors—The One, and the Dyad or
Two, this last being identified with the Indeterminate; and the Good was
affirmed to be identical with the One, while Evil was the Unbounded or
Undetermined, ἀόριστον and ἄπειρον.* Thus did the noble light of
philosophy in Plato go out in a fog of mystical Pythagoreanism.

In this Pythagorean morass, as we learn from the same authority, the
brilliant doctrine of Ideas was submerged and quenched. Yet that
doctrine stands, and will stand to posterity, as the purest type of the
Platonic metaphysics. It is true of Plato, as of all his countrymen with
the partial exception of Aristotle, that while their moral and political
thoughts abound in a wisdom both practical and of permanent application,
their metaphysical speculations are only interesting as the first
efforts of original and inventive minds to let in light on a dark
subject. The Platonic Ideas are nothing more; but, of all theories which
have arisen in ingenious minds from an imperfect conception of the
processes of abstraction and generalization, they are surely among the
most plausible as well as beautiful. Men already abstracted and
generalized before Plato wrote, or they would not have been human
beings; but they did so by an unconscious working of the laws of
association, which resembled an instinct: no theory ofnthosen operations
was in existence till Plato formed one, and the mere direction of
consciousness upon the processes themselves was a new thing, which, as
we see in many of the dialogues, even an intelligent pupil required to
be assisted to do by a great prodigality of illustration. Now a
contemplative mind soon perceived that all the objects of sense, whether
substances, attributes, or events—and the noblest objects most—are that
which they are, in only an imperfect manner, and suggest to the mind a
type of what they are, far more perfect than themselves; a “something
far more deeply interfused,”[*] which eye has not seen nor ear heard,[†]
but of which that Edition: current; Page: [422] which can be seen or
heard is an imperfect, and often very distant, resemblance. Psychology
in its infancy did not yet enable men to perceive that the mind itself
creates this more perfect type, by comparison and abstraction from the
imperfect materials of its experience; but they perceived that the types
embodied the unattainable perfection of all other things, and were the
models which Nature itself seemed to strive to approach. What, then,
could be more natural than to regard the types as real objects,
concealed from sense, but cognisable directly by the mind—which, once
conceived as external to us, seemed more real than anything else, all
other things resembling imperfect attempts to copy them? The
Self-Beautiful, the Self-Good, which not only were to all beautiful and
good things as the ideal is to the actual, but united in themselves the
separate perfections of all the various kinds of beauty and
goodness—these forms or essences, from a participation in which all
concrete things derive what they possess of goodness and beauty, but
paled and disfigured by the turbid element in which they are
immersed—these existences, so vastly more splendid than their feeble
earthly representatives, and not, like them, subject to injury or
decay—must not they be Realities in a far higher sense than the
particulars which are within sensible cognisance? particulars which
indeed are not realities: for there is no particular good or beautiful
or just thing, which is not, in some case that may be supposed, unjust,
evil, and unbeautiful. Was it not then to be presumed that the part of
our nature which apprehends these Real Existences would perceive them
far more clearly, but for the veil of sense interposed; and that it is
only when the veil is removed, that we pass out of the world of images
and likenesses into that of the Things themselves, and contemplate the
splendid vision in all its brightness? But even in this world of
shadows, the mind of the philosopher, trained by the dialectic process
to see “the One in the Many,” can achieve, by arduous labour, such a
perception of the Ideal Forms, as qualifies him for admission to a
nearer and more satisfactory view of them in a life after death.

The mode in which Plato was led, by the same train of thought, to
another of his opinions, the famous doctrine of Reminiscence, is not
left for us to divine. It is shown to us in the Menon, in which more
that is characteristic of Plato is brought together in a smaller space
than in any other dialogue: if the Phædon and the Gorgias are noble
statues, the Menon is a gem. Why is it, asks Sokrates,[*] that when we
seek for something we do not know, we yet know what we are seeking? and
how comes it that we are able to recognise it when found? This, it
seems, had been one of the puzzles of these early thinkers, resembling
others of which Edition: current; Page: [423] great notice is taken in
the Platonic writings: not quibbles of captious sophists, as
commentators and historians of philosophy pretend, but difficulties
really embarrassing to those who were trying to understand their own
mental operations. Whyo, asks Sokrates,o does truth (so hard to find)
when found, approve itself to us, often instantaneously, as truth? He
can think of no explanation, but that we had known it in a former life,
and need only to be reminded of our knowledge. Modern thinkers who have
stopped short at Plato’s point of view, resolve the difficulty by
pronouncing the knowledge to be intuitive. But Plato could not put up
with this explanation; he knew too well how slowly, painfully, and at
last imperfectly, the knowledge is acquired. The whole process of
philosophizing was conceived by him as a laborious effort to call former
knowledge back to mind. His doctrine is related to that of Wordsworth’s
ode, erroneously called Platonic, not as identical but as opposite: with
Wordsworth our life here is “a sleep and a forgetting,”[*] with Plato it
is a recollecting. We at once perceive the support which this doctrine
gives to Plato’s conception of the process of instruction (a conception
supremely important in his own and in all time) that “teaching and
learning are words without meaning;”* that knowledge is “to be evolved
out of the mind, not poured into it from without.”† The intimate
connexion between the doctrine of Reminiscence and that of Ideas, even
were it not obvious, would be shown by the Phædon, in which the
Reminiscence theory is maintained on the express ground that every
existing thing, in itself incomplete, brings to mind a type of its own
nature more perfect than itself; and as we can only be reminded of that
which we once knew, we must have known the type in a former life. The
two doctrines are inseparably blended in the poetic mythe delivered by
Sokrates in the Phædrus; and when in Plato’s later years the one
doctrine drops out of his speculations, so does the other.

The doctrine of Pre-existence is naturally connected with that of
Immortality; and in the Phædon the arguments for the latter are mostly
grounded on the former. That wonderful dialogue, which divides with
perhaps the Gorgias alone, the honour of being the most finished and
consummate prose composition in Plato, if not in all literature—which
combines in itself more sources of the grandest interest, more
artistically fused together, than any other of Plato’s works—contains
not one argument which is not a fallacy, or which could convince any one
not anxiously desirous to be convinced. Plato himself, when he
approaches the subject in other Edition: current; Page: [424] dialogues,
resorts to quite different arguments, more resembling those on which
recent schools of metaphysics have grounded the doctrines of
Spiritualism. For instance, in the Leges, he argues that Mind or Soul,
the principle of Life, is the only thing which originates
motion—inanimate objects only carrying on and transmitting force
communicated to them from elsewhere; that Mind, therefore, rules Matter,
and must be anterior to it (πρεσβύτερον), and not subject to its
laws.[*] This argument, though adduced only as proof of a Divine
government, is available for the other purpose, and though we are far
from thinking it conclusive, is worth all those of the Phædon put
together. As Mr. Grote remarks, though the personal incidents of the
Phædon are Sokratic, and are probably those which really happened, its
doctrines and arguments are exclusively Platonic.[†] Sokrates, it is
well known, professed no dogmatic certainty about another life. It is
all the more worthy of note, that Plato had not yet abandoned the
Sokratic canon of belief—viz. that it ought to be the genuine,
unbiassed, untampered with, conviction of the individual reason, after
giving an impartial hearing to every argument that can be thought of. As
the Gorgias proclaims, with an energy and solemnity never surpassed, the
rights of the individual intellect, and the obligation on every one,
though the whole world should be on the contrary side, to stand firm, he
alone, in asserting what recommends itself to his own reason; so in the
Phædon, as Mr. Grote observes in one of his many valuable remarks on
that dialogue:

Freedom of debate and fulness of search, the paramount value of
“reasoned truth”—the necessity of keeping up the force of individual
reason by constant argumentative exercise—and the right of independent
judgment for hearer as well as speaker—stand emphatically proclaimed in
these last words of the dying philosopher. He does not announce the
immortality of the soul as a dogma of imperative orthodoxy; which men,
whether satisfied with the proofs or not, must believe, or make
profession of believing, on pain of being shunned as a moral pestilence,
and disqualified from giving testimony in a court of justice. He sets
forth his own conviction, with the grounds on which he adopts it. But he
expressly recognises the existence of dissentient opinions; he invites
his companions to bring forward every objection; he disclaims all
special purpose of impressing his own conclusions upon their minds; nay,
he expressly warns them not to be biassed by their personal sympathies,
then wound up to the highest pitch, towards himself. He entreats them to
preserve themselves from being tinged with misology, or the hatred of
free argumentative discussion, and he ascribes this mental vice to the
early habit of easy, uninquiring, implicit belief; since a man thus
ready of faith, embracing opinions without any discriminating test,
presently finds himself driven to abandon one opinion after another,
until at last he mistrusts all opinions, and Edition: current; Page:
[425] hates the process of discussing them, laying the blame on
philosophy instead of upon his own intellect. . . .Sokrates is depicted
as having not only an affirmative opinion, but even strong conviction,
on a subject of great moment; which conviction, moreover, he is
specially desirous of preserving unimpaired, during his few remaining
hours of life. Yet even here he manifests no anxiety to get that
conviction into the minds of his friends, except as a result of their
own independent scrutiny and self-working reason. Not only he does not
attempt to terrify them into believing, by menace of evil consequences
if they do not, but he repudiates pointedly even the gentler machinery
of conversion, which might work on their minds through attachment to
himself and reverence for his authority. His devotion is to “reasoned
truth;” he challenges his friends to the fullest scrutiny by their own
independent reason; he recognises the sentence that they pronounce
afterwards as valid for them, whether concurrent with himself or
adverse. Their reason is for them what his reason is for him; requiring,
both alike (as Sokrates here proclaims) to be stimulated as well as
controlled by all-searching debate, but postulating equal liberty of
final decision for each one of the debaters.*

One of the things for which Plato has been most applauded by those
modern schools which pique themselves on counting him among their
precursors, is the warfare which he is supposed to have made on a
sceptical philosophy, attributed, totally without evidence, to the
Sophists generally, and considered as one of the means by which they
demoralized the Greeks. The doctrines meant are two. One is the special
tenet of Herakleitus (who was not a Sophist, except in the loose sense
in which all speculative thinkers were so called), that the universe is
in a state of perpetual flux, in which nothing is, but all things become
(εἰ̑ναι, γίγνεσθαι; the Hegelian Seyn and Werden). The other is the
doctrine of Protagoras, that “Man is the measure of all things: of
things which are, that they are, and of things which are not, that they
are not. As things appear to me, so they are to me: as they appear to
you, such they really are to you.”[*] In other words, the doctrine of
the Subjective nature of truth: which is a scandal to philosophers, as
seeming to make all opinions equally true, and truth “that which each
man troweth.”[†]

Now, what the Herakleitean doctrine affirms of all things, is what Plato
himself believed of the phenomenal world—of things cognisable by sense.
The only thing which he regarded as really existing, τὸ ὄντως ὄν, was
the Intelligible World, the world of Self-existent Forms; the
extramundane prototypes of that, in the visible universe, which seems,
but is not, real existence, and which is considered by him as something
intermediate Edition: current; Page: [426] between Ens and Non-Ens.*
Herakleitus did not believe in these Forms, and that was the amount of
difference between him and Plato. When they both refused to the world of
sense what they called Real Existence, they did not mean to deny what
wepunderstand by the term, but only what the ancient thinkers understood
by itp. What they denied of the visible universe, was Existence in a
transcendent sense—the Existence per se which Plato ascribed to his
Ideas, and Xenophanes and Parmenides to their Ens Unum. In modern
phrase, Herakleitus denied the Absolute; though his doctrine of a really
existent Principle of Change, and his other tenet of an Universal Reason
apart from individual minds, a doctrine much in favour with some modern
Transcendentalists, reintroduced an Absolute of another kind. Now it may
safely be affirmed that no scepticism, limited to the Absolute, ever did
anybody harm, or made the smallest practical difference to any human
being. The doctrine of Protagoras requires a little more consideration.
Though we may reasonably suppose that Plato, in the Theœtetus, gives it
in that Sophist’s words, we are ignorant by what reasons Protagoras
defended it, or in what sense he explained it. Sir William Hamilton
considered it to mean his own doctrine of the Relativity of human
knowledge, and placed Protagoras at the head of his list of early
authorities in support of that doctrine.[*] Mr. Grote interprets the
maxim Homo Mensura in the same sense, but includes also in its meaning
the autonomy of the individual intellect.[†] That everything is true to
me, which appears so Edition: current; Page: [427] to me, he understands
to mean, that my reception of it as truth depends, and ought to depend,
on the impression which the evidence makes upon my own mind. Mr. Grote,
therefore, defends the Protagorean doctrine against the Sokrates of the
Theœtetus; but his defence, though useful and instructive, does not
satisfy us, and is the only important point in the whole work on which
we find ourselves differing from Mr. Grote. For the truth of an opinion,
even to myself, is a different thing from my reception of it as true,
since it implies reference to an external standard. My mind, on the
evidence before it, may accept as truth that I am five miles from
London; but when I set out to walk the distance, and find it ten, the
ten miles were all along as true for me as for other people. Protagoras
cannot well have intended to deny this, but he cannot be acquitted of an
incorrect and misleading mode of expression. His proposition is valid as
to our present feelings or states of consciousness, the truth of which
has no meaning except that we are actually feeling them; and this is
probably the reason why Plato (erroneously in Mr. Grote’s opinion)[*]
identifies it with the doctrine that knowledge is sensible perception
(αἴσθησις), the truth of the one doctrine being coextensive with the
sphere of the other. But it is not true of the past, the future, the
absent, or anything present except the feeling in our mind. It is
invalid as to all that are called matters of belief or opinion: for a
belief or opinion is relative not only to the believing mind, but to
something else—namely, the matter of fact which the belief is about. The
truth of the belief is its agreement with that fact. Mr. Grote says: “To
say that all men recognise one and the same objective distinction
between truth and falsehood, would be to contradict palpable facts. Each
man has a standard, an ideal of truth in his own mind; but different men
have different standards.”* Of the proof of truth, yes: but not, we
apprehend, of truth itself. No one means anything by truth, but the
agreement of a belief with the fact which it purports to represent. We
grant that, according to the philosophy which we hold in common with Mr.
Grote, the fact itself, if knowable by us, is relative to our
perceptions—to our senses or our internal consciousness; and our opinion
about the fact is so too; but the truth of the opinion is a question of
relation between these two relatives, one of which is an objective
standard for the other. Justice is not done to Plato’s attack on “Homo
Mensura” without considering this aspect of the matter; the rather as he
himself brings forward these very arguments. Sokrates asks, Since man is
the measure of all things, and has the criterion of truth in himself,
whatever he thinks or perceives being true to him, will the criterion
serve for things yet to come? If he thinks he shall catch a fever
Edition: current; Page: [428] and feel hot, and a physician thinks the
contrary, will he be feverish and hot to himself, but not to the
physician?[*] A fair reductio ad absurdum, and a just criticism on
Protagoras, though, if Mr. Grote is right in his interpretation of the
Protagorean dictum, the error is in language, not in thought. But in
philosophy, especially where it touches the ultimate foundations of our
reason, wrong language is as misleading as a wrong opinion.

This dialogue, the Theætetus, though it ends without any conclusion,
leaving the question proposed in it unanswered, is one of the most
suggestive in all Plato by the number of points of view it brings
forward; and is among the finest examples in his writings of genuine
honest Search, in which the confutation of any one, even when it falls
in his way, is only incidental, and even then the greatest pains are
taken to put, in the most forcible manner, whatever the confuted person
could say. In arguing against Protagoras (who is treated with a respect
in marked contrast with the manner in which the Herakleiteans, and some
materialistic philosophers, supposed to be the school of Demokritus, are
referred to), Sokrates laments the necessity of disputing his opinion
when he is not present nor even alive to defend it; says that as he and
his friends are not here to help their doctrine, the obligation lies on
their adversaries to do it; and fulfils that obligation by a discourse
of some length,[†] which, like those of Glaukon and Adeimantus in the
Republic, is a monument of the essential fairness of Plato’s mind. The
Theætetus contains some of Plato’s acutest examinations of certain
speculative questions which often recur in other dialogues: among others
the difference between Knowledge and True Opinion, ὀρθή or ἀληθὴς δόξα.
This distinction gave Plato great trouble, and the whole subject of the
truth and falsity of opinions was full of intricacy and logical
embarrassment to him and to his cotemporaries.[‡] Among other points, it
appears to have been a serious puzzle to them, in what manner false
opinions could be possible; how we can think that which is not—a
non-entity—any more than we can touch, or eat, or drink that which is
not.[§] It is surprising how often Plato returns to this perplexity.
More than half the Sophistes is devoted to the discussion of it, merely
in a parenthesis. As a specimen of the stumbling-blocks which the early
metaphysical inquirers found in their path, as well as a striking
example of the diversity of the points of view of different dialogues,
we will quote a passage from Mr. Grote on this subject:

How is a false proposition possible? Many held that a false proposition
and a false Edition: current; Page: [429] name were impossible, that you
could not speak the things that is not,[*] or Non-Ens (τὸ μὴ ὄν): that
such a proposition would be an empty sound, without meaning or
signification; that speech may be significant or insignificant, but
could not be false, except in the sense of being unmeaning. Now this
doctrine is dealt with in the Theætêtus, Sophistês, and Kratylus. In the
Theætêtus, Sokratês examines it at great length, and proposes several
different hypotheses to explain how a false proposition might be
possible; but ends in pronouncing them all inadmissible. He declares
himself incompetent, and passes on to something else. Again, in the
Sophistês, the same point is taken up, and discussed there also very
copiously. The Eleate in that dialogue ends by finding a solution which
satisfies him—(viz. that τὸ μὴ ὄν = τὸ ἕτερον του̑ ὄντος).[†] But what is
remarkable is, that the solution does not meet any of the difficulties
propounded in the Theœtêtus; nor are these difficulties at all adverted
to in the Sophistês. Finally in the Kratylus, we have the very same
doctrine, that false affirmations are impossible,—which both in the
Theætêtus and in the Sophistês is enunciated, not as the decided opinion
of the speaker, but as a problem which embarrasses him—we have this same
doctrine averred unequivocally by Kratylus as his own full conviction.
And Sokratês finds that a very short argument, and a very simple
comparison, suffice to refute him. The supposed “aggressive
cross-examiner,” who presses Sokratês so hard in the Theætêtus, is not
allowed to put his puzzling questions in the Kratylus.

How are we to explain these three different modes of handling the same
question by the same philosopher? If the question about Non-Ens can be
disposed of in the summary way which we read in the Kratylus, what is
gained by the string of unsolved puzzles in the Theætêtus, or by the
long discursive argument in the Sophistês, ushering in a new solution no
way satisfactory? If, on the contrary, the difficulties which are
unsolved in the Theætêtus, and imperfectly solved in the Sophistês, are
real and pertinent,—how are we to explain the proceeding of Plato in the
Kratylus, when he puts into the mouth of Kratylus a distinct averment of
the opinion about Non-Ens, yet without allowing him, when it is impugned
by Sokratês, to urge any of these pertinent arguments in defence of it?
If the peculiar solution given in the Sophistês be the really genuine
and triumphant solution, why is it left unnoticed both in the Kratylus
and the Theætêtus, and why is it contradicted in other dialogues? Which
of the three dialogues represents Plato’s real opinion on the question?

To these questions, and to many others of like bearing, connected with
the Platonic writings, I see no satisfactory reply, if we are to
consider Plato as a positive philosopher, with a scheme and edifice of
methodized opinions in his mind; and as composing all his dialogues with
a set purpose, either of inculcating these opinions on the reader, or of
refuting the opinions opposed to them. This supposition is what most
Platonic critics have in their minds, even when professedly modifying
it. Their admiration for Plato is not satisfied unless they conceive him
in the professorial chair as a teacher, surrounded by a crowd of
learners, all under the obligation (incumbent on learners generally) to
believe what they hear. Reasoning upon such a basis, the Platonic
dialogues present themselves to me as a mystery. They exhibit neither
identity of the teacher, nor identity of the matter taught: the composer
(to Edition: current; Page: [430] use various Platonic comparisons) is
Many, and not One—he is more complex than Typhôs.*

There is a similar discrepancy in the view taken by Plato, in different
dialogues, of the distinction between True Opinion and Knowledge. In the
Menon, it would seem as if the two were much the same, except that
Opinion is “evanescent, and will not stay in the mind, while Knowledge
is permanent and ineffaceable.”† True Opinion is converted into
Knowledge, when bound down (δεδεμένον) “by a chain of causal
reasoning”[*] (αἰτίας λογισμῳ̑). This binding process, it is added, is
ἀνάμνησις, or reminding, and can only be accomplished by questioning,
sufficiently repeated and diversified.[†] What the ἀνάμνησις does is
rather differently defined in the Phædrus; it there generates the
apprehension of the general Concept,‡ which in that dialogue means the
Self-existent Idea. In other dialogues the view taken is very similar,
minus the idea of Reminiscence. Knowledge is that of which a rational
explanation can be given; that which is guaranteed by both arms of the
dialectic process, being able to resist all confutation, and having been
arrived at by a correct use of the logical process of Division,
διαίρεσις κατ’ εἴδη, terminating in an unimpeachable Definition.
Anything short of this is only Opinion. We here have what is rightly
regarded as the characteristically Platonic view of the subject; but it
is remarkable that this very definition of knowledge, ἀληθὴς δόξα μετὰ
λόγου, is one of those propounded by Theætetus, and, after a long
discussion between him and Sokrates, abandoned.[‡] The most elaborate,
but the obscurest exposition we find of this subject, is in the sixth
and seventh books of the Republic. We cannot give it at length, but its
leading point is, that knowledge is of Forms or Ideas, while Opinion
relates to the world of sense, composed of mere images of those Forms.§
But the knowledge of Forms is only to be acquired by Dialectics.¶

Among views so contradictory, and in which no common conviction or
purpose appears, what worth, it may be asked, is there to us in the
investigations? Besides the worth of their Method, they have, though in
unequal degrees, a value in their substance;

Edition: current; Page: [431]
not in the conclusion, but in the premises for and against it. In this
sense all the dialogues have value, and all the same sort of value,
though not all equal in amount. In different dialogues, the same subject
is set before you in different ways; with remarks and illustrations
sometimes tending towards one theory, sometimes towards another. It is
for you to compare and balance them, and to elicit such result as your
reason approves. The Platonic dialogues require, in order to produce
their effect, a supplementary responsive force, and a strong effective
reaction, from the individual reason of the reader: they require
moreover that he shall have a genuine interest in the process of
dialectic scrutiny (τὸ ϕιλομαθές, ϕιλόλογον), which will enable him to
perceive beauties in what would be tiresome to others.*

As regards Plato himself, the probability is that there was a period in
his life when he was, on merely speculative points, a real Seeker,
testing every opinion, and bringing prominently forward the difficulties
which adhere to them all; and that during this period many of his
principal dialogues were written, from points of view extremely various,
embodying in each the latest trains of thought which had passed through
his mind on the particular subject. That the difficulties of his own
suggesting, even after he had definitively identified himself with the
opinions to which they apply, are hardly ever solved, seems only
explicable on the supposition that he had ceased to care about solving
them, having come to think that insoluble difficulties were always to be
expected. He certainly, if we trust his Seventh Epistle, was then of
opinion that no verbal definition of anything can precisely hit the
mark, and that the knowledge of what a thing is, though not attainable
till after a long and varied course of dialectic debate, is never the
direct result of discussion, but comes out at last (and only in the
happier natures) by a sort of instantaneous flash. He probably became
indifferent to speculation for its own sake, ceased to expect that any
theoretical position would be found unassailable, and no longer cared
for anything but practical results. In his latest compositions there is
no abatement of ethical earnestness, but “the love of dialectic, and the
taste for enunciating difficulties even when he could not clear them up,
died out within him.”† He almost became infected with the misology so
impressively deprecated in his own Phædon, and an example among many,
that this misology is not always, as there represented, the road to
scepticism, but still oftener to the most intolerant affirmative
dogmatism.

The ethical and political doctrines of Plato are really the only ones
which can be regarded as serious and deeply-rooted convictions. At the
head of these, or only second after his faith in the exclusive
eligibility of the just life, must be placed the opinion common to him
with Sokrates, that Virtue is a branch of Intelligence, or Knowledge.
His best argument for this Edition: current; Page: [432] opinion is,
that not only all the external things we value, such as health,
strength, and pecuniary means, but all that we regard as
virtues—courage, temperance, and the rest—may be so used as to do harm
instead of good: they all require a discriminating faculty to decide
when they ought to be employed and when not; and this, which is the
distinctive element of virtue, is a part of Knowledge. Though the
premises of this argument are profoundly true, they only prove that the
knowledge in question is one of the conditions of virtue, but not that
it is virtue itself; something else besides the knowledge of what is
right being necessary to induce us to practise it. We know what would
have been Plato’s answer to this objection. He would have said, that the
further condition required is also a knowledge, the knowledge that to do
right is good; no one desires evil knowing it to be evil; it is desired
because it is believed to be good. But even if Plato had proved, as
completely as he thought he had, that to do wrong is the greatest evil
which can befall the wrong-doer, it would have remained a question
whether the habitually vicious man is capable of having this belief
impressed upon him; whether the evidence that happiness is to be found
in virtue alone, can reach a mind not prepared for it by already
possessing the virtues of courage, temperance, &c., not to mention
justice, the most fundamental of all.

This exaltation of Knowledge—not Intellect, or mere mental ability, of
which there is no idolatry at all in Plato, but scientific knowledge,
and scientifically-acquired craftsmanship, as the one thing needful in
every concern of life, and pre-eminently in government—is the pervading
idea in Plato’s practical doctrines. He derived it from Sokrates, who
(says Xenophon) “considered as kings and rulers not those who wield the
sceptre, or those who have been chosen by the incompetent (ὑπὸ τω̑ν
τυχόντων), nor those who have drawn the successful lot, or who by force
or deceit have got into the highest place, but those who know how to
rule.”* What constitutes the man who knows how to rule, is the subject
of an important dialogue, the Politikos. We there learn that he is one
of the rarest of human beings; that the greatest concern of a State is
to obtain such a man, and place him at the head of it; that when so
placed, his power cannot be too absolute; to limit him by laws, even of
his own making, being as absurd as if a scientific physician were
required never to deviate from his own prescriptions. This exclusive
right of the most capable person to rule—a principle strenuously
asserted by Plato against the theory and practice of all governments
(modern as well as ancient); and the doctrine that when this Capable
Person has been obtained, the rest of the community have nothing to do
but to obey him—form a theory of government which Edition: current;
Page: [433] must be quite to the taste of Mr. Carlyle; but he is
probably less pleased with the further proposition added by Plato, that
the depositary of this divine right is not found, but made, and that his
qualification is Science; a philosophic and reasoned knowledge of human
affairs—of what is best for mankind. When this is possessed, it is a far
surer guide than laws, which cannot possibly be adapted to all
individual cases; but when this scientific wisdom cannot be had, laws
are better than any mere counterfeit of it: “The true government of
mankind is the scientific or artistic; whether it be carried on by one,
or a few, or many—whether by poor or rich, by force or consent—whether
according to law, or without law.” But

true science or art is not attainable by many persons, whether rich or
poor; scarcely even by a few, and probably by One alone; since the
science or art of governing men is more difficult than any other science
or art. But the government of this One is the only true and right
government, whether he proclaims law or governs without law, whether he
employs severity or mildness—provided only he adheres to his art, and
achieves its purpose, the good and improvement of the governed. He is
like the true physician, who cuts and burns patients, when his art
commands, for the purpose of curing them. He will not be disposed to
fetter himself by fixed general laws; for the variety of situations and
the fluctuation of circumstances is so perpetual, that no law can
possibly fit all cases. He will recognise no other law but his art. If
he lays down any general formula or law, it will only be from necessity,
because he cannot be always at hand to watch and direct each individual
case; but he will not hesitate to depart from his own formula whenever
Art enjoins it. That alone is base, evil, unjust, which he with his
political science or art declares to be so. If in any particular case he
departs from his own declaration, and orders such a thing to be done,
the public have no right to complain that he does injustice. No patient
can complain of his physician if the latter, acting upon the counsels of
his art, disregards a therapeutic formula. All the acts of the true
Governor are right, whether according or contrary to law, so long as he
conducts himself with art and intelligence—aiming exclusively to
preserve the people, and to render them better instead of worse. How
mischievous would it be . . . if we prescribed by fixed laws how the
physician and the steersman should practise their respective arts; if we
held them bound to peremptory rules, punishing them whenever they
departed from those rules, and making them accountable before the
Dikastery, whenever any one accused them of doing so—if we consecrated
these rules and dogmas, forbidding all criticism or censure upon them,
and putting to death the free inquirer as a dreaming, prosy Sophist,
corrupting the youth and inciting lawless discontent! How absurd, if we
pretended that every citizen did know, or might or ought to know, these
two arts; because the matters concerning them were enrolled in the laws,
and because no one ought to be wiser than the laws! Who would think of
imposing any such fetters on other arts, such as those of the general,
the painter, the husbandman, the carpenter, the prophet, the
cattle-dealer? To impose them would be to render life, hard as it is
even now, altogether intolerable. Yet these are the trammels under which
in actual cities the political Art is exercised.

Such are the mischiefs inseparable, in greater or less degree, from
fixed and peremptory laws. Yet grave as these mischiefs are, there are
others yet graver, which such laws tend to obviate. If the Magistrate
appointed to guard and enforce Edition: current; Page: [434] the laws,
ventures to break or contravene them, simulating, but not really
possessing, the Art or Science of the genuine Ruler, he will make
matters far worse. The laws at any rate are such as the citizens have
been accustomed to, and such as give a certain measure of satisfaction.
But the arbitrary rule of this violent and unscientific Governor is a
tyranny, which is greatly worse than the laws. Fixed laws are thus a
second-best; assuming that you cannot obtain a true scientific, artistic
Governor. If such a man could be obtained, men would be delighted to
live under him. But they despair of ever seeing such a character, and
they therefore cling to fixed laws, in spite of the numerous concomitant
mischiefs. These mischiefs are indeed so serious, that when we look at
actual cities, we are astonished how they get on under such a system;
and we cannot but feel how firm and deeply-rooted a city naturally is.
We see therefore . . . that there is no true polity—nothing which
deserves the name of a genuine political society—except the government
of one chief, scientific or artistic. With him laws are superfluous, and
even inconvenient. All other polities are counterfeits; factions and
cabals rather than governments, delusions carried on by tricksters and
conjurors. But among these other polities or sham-polities, there is a
material difference as to greater or less badness; and the difference
turns upon the presence or absence of good laws. Thus, the single-headed
government, called monarchy (assuming the Prince not to be a man of
science or art) is the best of all the sham-polities, if the Prince
rules along with and in observance of known good laws; but it is the
worst of them all, if he rules without such laws, as a despot or tyrant.
Oligarchy, or the government of a few, if under good laws, is less good
than that of the Prince under the same circumstances—if without such
laws, is less bad than that of the despot. Lastly, the government of the
many is less good under the one supposition, and less bad under the
other. It is less effective, either for good or for evil. It is in fact
less of a government; the administrative force being lost by dissipation
among many hands for short intervals; and more free play being thus left
to individuals. Accordingly, assuming the absence of laws, democracy is
the least bad or most tolerable of the six varieties of sham-polity.
Assuming the presence of laws, it is the worst of them.*

The ideal of government expressed in this passage, though expanded and
minutely applied in other works, is never materially varied. Of the two
detailed treatises on Government, in the dialogue form, which we have
from Plato, the Republic and the Leges, the former is a delineation of
his best form of society, under the unrestricted authority of one or a
very small number, scientifically trained and fitted for the function of
rulers. The Leges must be understood (and that is its best excuse) as a
set of directions for the construction and preservation of his
second-best State, in which, the scientific ruler not being forthcoming,
an imperfect substitute is provided in the form of laws, which he seems
to have thought would only answer the purpose by being not only
inviolable but unalterable. Accordingly, in the ideal commonwealth of
the Republic, there is no responsibility of any kind—no provision for
written laws or courts of justice; the wisdom of the scientific rulers
being wholly trusted to, for doing without such things, or providing
them as far as required. The whole energy of Plato’s Edition: current;
Page: [435] constructive intellect is concentrated on the means of
sifting the most gifted natures out of the body of citizens, and
educating them from the earliest infancy to the age of fifty, by which
time, and not before, it is expected that a very few, or at least one,
competent scientific governor may be met with among them. This, and the
intellectual and emotional training of the remainder of the people, so
that they shall willingly obey and second these rightful chiefs, compose
the whole machinery of the Republic. In Leges, on the contrary, where no
such scientific rulers are looked for, there is an elaborate and minute
system of positive laws, carrying legal regulation down to the details
of common life, and accompanied by all the ordinary apparatus of courts
of justice; magistrates of various kinds chosen for short periods, by
processes from which even the democratic Lot is not wholly excluded—and
systematic accountability of all persons in office, in the Athenian
manner, after the expiration of their term, to an authority in which the
whole body of citizens have a qualified participation. The author does
not disguise that his government is not the abstractedly best; and
records his persistence, on some principal points, in those doctrines of
the Republic which are put in abeyance in the Leges, where the community
ostensibly contemplated is an actual Cretan colony.

While Plato has thus two independent plans for the constitution of a
political society, his notion of the end to be aimed at never varies.
The business of rulers is to make the people whom they govern wise and
virtuous. No political object but this is worth consideration.qWith
respect toq the other things usually desired by men and communities, he
does not indeed always maintain the scornful tone assumed in the
Gorgias, where all the statesmen of Athens, even the eminent ones of
old—Miltiades, Themistokles, Kimon, Perikles—are reproached for having
“filled the city with harbours, and docks, and fortifications, and
tributes, and similar rubbish” (ϕλυαριω̑ν), instead of improving their
desires, “the only business of a good citizen.”* In other places (as in
the Second Alcibiades, Euthydemus, Menon, Leges), he contents himself
with saying, that it is better not to have such things at all, than to
have them, if devoid of the wisdom without which they cannot profit the
possessor; or, with Sokrates in the Apologia, that wealth does not
produce virtue, but virtue wealth, and all other things that are
desirable. But, either as the sole desirable thing, or as the means of
obtaining all others, the wisdom and virtue of the citizens (considered
as identical) are the only proper end of government.

In the political theory thus conceived by Plato—confining ourselves to
his scheme of the ideally best, and neglecting his compromise with
existing Edition: current; Page: [436] obstacles in the comparatively
tame production of his decline—there are two things specially deserving
of remark. First, the vigorous assertion of a truth, of transcendent
importance and universal application—that the work of government is a
Skilled Employment; that governing is not a thing which can be done at
odd times, or by the way, in conjunction with a hundred other pursuits,
nor to which a person can be competent without a large and liberal
general education, followed by special and professional study, laborious
and of long duration, directed to acquiring, not mere practical
dexterity, but a scientific mastery of the subject. This is the strong
side of the Platonic theory. Its weak side is, that it postulates
infallibility, or something near it, in rulers thus prepared; or else
ascribes such a depth of comparative imbecility to the rest of mankind,
as to unfit them for any voice whatever in their own government, or any
power of calling their scientific ruler to account. The error of Plato,
like most of the errors of profound thinkers, consisted in seeing only
one half of the truth; and (as is also usual with such thinkers) the
half which he asserted, was that which he found neglected and left in
the background by the institutions and customs of his country. His
doctrine was an exaggerated protest against the notion that any man is
fit for any duty; a phrase which is the extreme formula of that
indifference to special qualifications, and to the superiority of one
mind over another, to which there is more or less tendency in all
popular governments, and doubtless at Athens, as well as in the United
States and in Great Britain, though it would be a mistake to regard it
in any of them as either universal or incurable.

But though Plato had no hesitation in allowing absolute power to the
scientific ruler when he had got one, the superiority of his genius is
displayed in his clear perception of the difficulties with which this
scheme of government was beset, and in the boldness with which he
grappled with the problem; daring all things, however opposed to the
common notions of his time (and of ours), if he could see his way to
removing the rocks and shoals which threatened to be fatal to his
commonwealth. The mental superiority which gives the divine right to
rule, did not, in his opinion, consist in being able forcibly to seize
the powers of government, and retain them by sternly repressing all
active opposition and silencing every disapproving voice. This was a
common enough phenomenon in Plato’s time, not quite unknown in ours; but
the superiority which Plato required in his ruler was of a very
different kind. According to him, it was precisely the young men most
gifted by nature, and most capable of being trained to the character of
genuine rulers, that when perverted by the false standard of good and
evil prevailing in existing society, and delivering themselves up to
selfish and lawless ambition, fall into the deep-dyed iniquity of the
Tyrannus. In that combination of profound philosophy with sublime
eloquence and rich Edition: current; Page: [437] poetic imagination
which composes the later books of the Republic, there is a moving
picture of the mode in which society, by its temptations and its
wrongly-placed applauses and condemnations, corrupts these originally
fine natures: and the portraiture of the full-blown Tyrannus, in the
consummation of his guilt, his hatefulness to gods and men, the depth of
his inward misery, and the retribution that awaits him, generally in
this life, but certainly in a world to come, is one of the best known
and most impressive passages in Plato.[*] The Platonic ruler or rulers,
as already remarked, are not found, but made; and the problem of making
them was conceived by him in all its magnitude and difficulty. It could
only be achieved by centering upon them, and upon the class from whom
they were to be selected, every kind of tuition and training,
intellectual, emotional, and practical, that could help to form the
character required, andrbyr withdrawing them utterly from the influence
of those conditions of ordinary life, which give rise to inclinations
and to a type of character disqualifying for the pure and noble use of
irresponsible power.

To this purpose belongs the proscription of all such tales and legends
of the gods (legends as sacred to the Greeks as the narratives of the
Old and New Testaments to the ordinary Christian) as represented them to
be the authors of any evil, or imputed to them unjust commands, or human
weaknesses, or ascribed to them, or their descendants the Heroes, any
acts which would be wicked or disreputable if done by ordinary human
beings. These stories, Plato affirms, are not true; but were they so,
they should not be suffered to be repeated and believed. Other legends,
of a moral and elevating character, should be composed (a thing
considered by him quite within the competence of Government), and the
people brought up in the belief of them from their first childhood. To
the same head belongs the exclusion from the Republic, not (as is
sometimes asserted) of all poets, but of those who will not consent to
the expurgation from their poems of all sentiments and opinions which
the philosophic rulers deem injurious: for instance, that death, or the
life after death, is fearful and horrible; and especially that most
pernicious opinion, that there can be happiness without virtue, or that
virtue is not itself the summit of happiness. Certain kinds of poetry
however, the epic and dramatic, are absolutely banished, in common with
all other indiscriminately mimetic or imitative arts. Art ought not to
represent, either to the senses or to the mind, the likeness of anything
but what is good and noble; nor ought the citizens to recite, or read,
or hear recited, an imitation of the thoughts, feelings, or conduct, or
bad, or degraded, or weak and foolish persons. The same severe
restrictions were Edition: current; Page: [438] placed on music, a most
important agent of good or evil in the estimation of Greeks, whose
popular education (except the gymnastic and military elements) was
chiefly emotional. No tunes or measures were tolerated in the Republic,
but such as were licensed by the authorities, by whom all that were of a
wailing, a relaxing, or a voluptuous character must be forbidden, those
only being retained which soothe and mitigate the violent emotions, or
which inspire active energy. To the same educational purpose belong the
peculiar institutions of Plato respecting property and marriage, which
have given some scandal to posterity, and would probably have given much
more, if Plato had been suspected of a penchant for scepticism and
materialism, instead of being admired as their chief enemy. The
explanation of this portion of his scheme is very simple. It was not
intended for the citizens generally, but for the ϕύλακες or military
profession, from whom the prince or the ruling elders were selected, and
who were the executors of their orders and the instruments of their
government. This armed body having the remaining citizens entirely at
their mercy, all was lost if they preferred their private interest to
that of the public; and Plato well knew, even with the most perfect
education he could give them, how little chance they had of escaping
this perversion. Since it did not consort with his idea of scientific
government to give the unscientific multitude even a joint authority in
their own affairs, there was only one mode of protection left; those in
command must have no private interests of their own to care for. The
other citizens have each their family and property, but the guardians
must have nothing which they can call their own. Their maintenance must
be temperately provided at a common table by the State; they must have
no private possessions, and must not know their own children. The object
is that which the Catholic Church seeks to obtain by the celibacy of its
clergy, and the communism of its monastic orders; exclusive devotion to
the purposes of their institution. Whatever else may be justly said
against this Platonic conception, it deserves any name rather than that
of a toleration of licentiousness; for it leaves less to individual
inclination than any existing practice, the public authorities deciding
(within the age appointed for “producing children for the city”)[*] who
should be united with whom. Mr. Grote truly remarks, that with the
customs of the Platonic commonwealth, and the Platonic physical and
mental education common to both sexes, the passion between them would be
likely to be reduced to its very lowest degree of power;[†] a result
decidedly intended and calculated on by Plato in the Leges.

Though not expressly remarked, it is continually visible in Mr. Grote’s
Edition: current; Page: [439] book, as well as in the works themselves,
how strong a hold the idea of the Division of Labour had taken on
Plato’s mind. He propounds it as explicitly as Adam Smith,[*] at the
beginning of his delineation of the natural constitution and growth of a
State; and it governs all the arrangements of his ideal Republic. To use
his own phrase, there shall be no double or triple men in the
commonwealth; each does one thing, and one only; in order that every one
may have that to do for which he has greatest natural aptitude, and that
each thing may be done by the person who has most studied and practised
it. Civil justice in a commonwealth, which furnishes him with the type
and illustrative exemplar of justice in an individual mind, consists in
every person’s doing his own appointed business, and not meddling with
that of another.* An artificer must not usurp the occupation of another
artificer; rulers alone must rule, guardians alone fight, producers
alone produce and have the ownership of the produce. When these limits
are observed, and no one interferes in the legitimate business of some
one else, the community is prosperous and harmonious; if not, everybody
has something which concerns him more nearly than the true discharge of
his own function; the energies of the different classes are distracted
by contests for power, and the State declines into some one of the
successive gradations of bad government, which a considerable portion of
the Republic is employed in characterizing. The demand for a Scientific
Governor, not responsible for any part of his conduct to his
unscientific fellow-citizens, is part of this general conception of
Division of Labour, and errs only by a too exclusive clinging to that
one principle.

It is necessary to conclude; though volumes might easily be occupied
with the topics on which Plato’s compositions throw light, either by the
truths he has reached, by the mode of his reaching them, or by his often
equally instructive errors. We would gladly also have quoted more
copiously from Mr. Grote; having said little or nothing of the important
discussions, on all the principal topics of Plato, which he hast, in
this work,t Edition: current; Page: [440] incidentally contributed to
the philosophy of the age from the stores of his richly endowed mind.
The point of view from which these topics are treated, as all acquainted
with Mr. Grote’s writings would expect, is that of the Experience
philosophy, as distinguished from the Intuitive or Transcendental; and
readers will esteem the discussions more or less highly, according to
their estimation of that philosophy; but few, we think, will dispute
that Mr. Grote, by this work, has placed himself in a distinguished rank
among its defenders, in an age in which it has been more powerfully and
discriminatingly defended than at any former time. For further knowledge
we must refer to the work itself, which will not only be the inseparable
companion of Plato’s writings, but which no student, of whatever school
of thought, can read without instruction, and no one who knows anything
of philosophy or the history of philosophy, without admiration and
gratitude.

Edition: current; Page: [441]


TAINE’S DE L’INTELLIGENCE
 1870

Edition: current; Page: [442]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Fortnightly Review, n.s. VIII (July, 1870), 121-4, headed (under the
general heading, “Critical Notice”), “De l’Intelligence. Par H[ippolyte]
Taine. Two vols. 8vo. Paris [: Hachette], 1870.” Signed “J. S. Mill.”
The essay was reprinted in the posthumous 4th vol. of Dissertations and
Discussions (London: Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer, 1875), 111-18.
Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A notice of Taine’s book ‘de
l’Intelligence’ in the Fortnightly Review of July 1, 1870” (MacMinn,
99). There is no copy of the essay in JSM’s library, Somerville College.

A manuscript fragment of part of the text (see 444a-a) is in the
Mill-Taylor Collection, British Library of Political and Economic
Science; there are no substantive variants between it and the printed
text. For comment on the composition of the essay and related matters,
see the Introduction and the Textual Introduction, lxviii-lxxiv and
xci-xcii above.

Edition: current; Page: [443]


Taine’s De l’Intelligence

m. taine is one of the most known in England—at least by repute—of the
present generation of thinkers and writers in France. The fact that one
of his principal writings is a History of English Literature,[*] has
made his name, in a certain degree, familiar to the readers of our
periodicals; and some are aware that his work contains ingenious and
original views on the philosophy of literature. But so slender is the
interest of most English readers in the philosophy of literature, or in
any but the biographic and anecdotic portion of its history; and so
excessive is the English distrust of all theories on the subject, that
M. Taine’s work, notwithstanding its special relation to England, would
probably be found to have obtained a greater amount of intelligent
recognition, and even of intelligent criticism, in France. A fortune the
reverse of this may be prophesied for the able and striking treatise
which he has just published. It is fitted to obtain an earlier and
higher appreciation in England than in France. The Philosophy of Mind at
present excites greater interest, and is more studied, on this side the
Channel, than at any former period of our history, except the brief
interval which began with Locke and terminated with Hume and Reid; and
M. Taine’s treatment of it has more in common with the best English
speculation than with any of the philosophies now prevalent in France.
Psychology and metaphysics have, it is true, a greater amount of nominal
cultivation in France than in England; they are part of the curriculum
of all the public establishments for higher instruction, which educate a
far larger proportion of the better-off classes than our universities.
But the official doctrine of those establishments is the effete
philosophy of Royer-Collard, Jouffroy, and Cousin—no longer made
stimulating to the intellect by the genius and vigour with which the
doctrines of the school were originally given forth by its founders. The
long ascendancy of Cousin in the University of France has filled all the
chairs of philosophy with disciples, twice or thrice removed, of himself
and of the Germans, with the practical effect of alienating most of the
minds which have received any scientific training from the study of
psychology altogether. M. Comte, the founder of the only rising
philosophic movement in France, treated all scientific study of the
mind, Edition: current; Page: [444] except through the medium of the
brain—we might even say of the skull—as altogether irrational. Those,
indeed, of his followers who adhere to the banner of M. Littré, have
thrown off this with many other prejudices of their master, and are
raising up readers and pupils for the English psychologists and for M.
Taine. With the exception, however, of a very meritorious volume by M.
Mervoyer,* M. Taine’s is the first serious attempt to supply the want of
a better than the official psychology. His book has a freshness, a
vigour, and a scientific spirit, to which we have been long unaccustomed
in works of French origin respecting the mind; and though its ultimate
influence will probably be great, it will for the present meet with no
countenance from any of the recognised representatives of that
department of French cultivation. But we feel certain that it will be
welcomed, as soon as known, by the most advanced school of English
mental science; for, while it has a marked and original distinctive
character of its own, unlike any other treatise on the subject, it is in
harmony and close alliance with many of the most thorough-going
speculations of the Association school of psychology. It diverges from
them only in the two concluding chapters, which, in our judgment,
overleap the bounds of really scientific inference, and, without even
the warrant of supposed intuition à priori, claim absolute validity
through all space and time for generalisations of human thought, which
we can only admit under the inherent limitations of human experience.

The method of M. Taine’s work is correctly described in his preface. He
thereasays: Under the name of our Intellect, what I intend to treat of
is our knowledge. The Intellect is only our faculty, capacity, or power
of knowing; and faculties, capacities, and powers are not Things, or
Entities, having an existence of their own, but merely a mode of
classifying, under certain heads, the facts which, by the forms of
language, they are spoken of as producing. I, therefore, go at once to
the facts themselves, which, in the present case, are the various
portions of our knowledge. I endeavour, first, to analyse this knowledge
into its simplest elements; and afterwards to ascertain the laws which
govern the assemblage of those elements, and to trace the manner in
which, by the operation of these laws, our different kinds of knowledge
are built up—from the simplest and most concrete perceptions, memories,
and expectations, to our most universal concepts and judgments; and I
attempt to estimate the certitude, and extent of validity, of all these.

The work, therefore, consists of two parts—an Analytic and a Synthetic.
Edition: current; Page: [445] The first, or analytic part, entitled “The
Elements of Knowledge,” is divided into four books—on Signs, on Images,
on Sensations, and on the Physical Conditions of Mental Events. By
signs, M. Taine does not mean exclusively names, but anything mental by
means of which we think of things not present to our senses. A sign, he
says, is always an image, more or less vague or faded. We think of an
individual object by what is called our remembrance of it, that is, by a
mental image, which, in the normal state, is very much vaguer and
fainter than the impression of which it is a copy. We think of classes
of objects by what is called a general idea, or general notion; this,
however, is again an image, still more vague in the greater part of its
contents, but in which the characters common to the whole class have
been made artificially predominant and distinct, by being associated
with a name. So that we always, in reality, think by means of images;
but we can make a very faint and imperfect image do the work; and it is
the instrument of naming, properly used, which alone, in any but the
most simple cases, enables us to do this with safety. M. Taine gives a
very instructive exposition of the mode in which (as pointed out by
Leibnitz, Condillac, and others) these imperfect images do duty in our
reasoning processes symbolically, in lieu of complete representations of
objects. And he shows how, by the artifice of general names, which
enables us to ensure the presence, in those mutilated images, of all
such characters of the objects as are essential to the reasoning, we are
able to arrive at true and definite conclusions respecting objects of
which we cannot have a perfectly distinct conception—such as very high
numbers, polygons with a thousand sides, and so forth.a

All our thoughts, then, being really images, our mental images form the
subject of the second book. Their nature, and the laws of their
recurrence, and of their decay or obliteration, are copiously
illustrated by interesting experiences, drawn both from the healthy and
from various morbid conditions. Images, again, being sensations more or
less faded or weakened, sensations are next treated of; they are
classified and analysed agreeably to the latest physiological
discoveries and the most advanced psychology, until the most simple and
elementary sensations, or what seem to be such, are arrived at. From
sensations the author proceeds to their physical conditions, the
constitution and functions, so far as ascertained, of the nervous
system.

The analysis of our knowledge having thus been carried down to the
simplest elements that can at present be reached, the second part—the
Synthesis—commences. This also is divided into four books: Of the
different kinds of Knowledge; the Knowledge of Bodies; the Knowledge of
Mind; the Knowledge of what is general (des choses générales).

The first three of these books, and a great part of the fourth, are
highly Edition: current; Page: [446] instructive reading to the student
of analytical psychology. The distinction between the original and the
acquired perceptions of our different senses, the origin and composition
of our ideas of external objects, the ultimate analysis of the ideas of
matter and mind, and many cognate subjects, are expounded, with great
metaphysical acumen, a judicious avoidance of many wrong turnings into
which previous thinkers have wandered, and a talent of exposition which
adds as much to the substantial value as it does to the attractiveness
of the treatise. All these subjects are illustrated by new and
characteristic observations and experiences. M. Taine has profited
largely by the speculations of the English thinkers with whom he most
nearly agrees, and he fully acknowledges the debt; but his conception of
the subject has only been enriched, not suggested by them; what they
have taught him seems merely to have fallen into its place in a system
of thought commenced within himself. The mutual support which he and
they lend to one another is the accordance of independent thinkers.

When, in the fourth book, M. Taine arrives at the subject of our
acquisition of general knowledge, he agrees fully, as to the principles
of generalisation from experience, with the English writers on the logic
of induction, and gives an excellent outline of the doctrines which he
holds in common with them. But, as already intimated, there is another
part of this final book in which he is at issue with those who are in
general his nearest allies, namely, on the evidence of axioms, which he
does not, like them, hold to be grounded on experience, and limited by
its conditions. Neither does he, however, even in the case of the axioms
of geometry, agree with those who consider them to be a peculiar class
of truths, known à priori, or intuitively evident. He thinks that they
may be demonstrated, and classes them among “analytic propositions”—that
is, truths latently included in the ideas which are the subject of them,
to be proved by evolving them out of the ideas; and he does, ingeniously
and quite legitimately, demonstrate some of them in this way. But this
does not seem to us at all to advance his main position. The fundamental
properties of a straight line may be, and are, contained in our concept
of a straight line; but if the concept itself is the product of
experience, the truth of the properties comes to us from the same
source. The concept can only be made up of properties which we observe:
we put the properties into the concept, and what we have put into it
there is nothing surprising in our afterwards finding in it. If, then,
our idea of a straight line is derived from observation (and we are not
sure that M. Taine denies it to be so), all that he maintains respecting
the proof of the axioms of geometry may be, and much of it must be,
admitted. In acquiring by observation the idea of a straight line, we
necessarily acquire, and include in the idea, the knowledge that two
straight lines joining the same two points coincide altogether; in other
words, do not enclose any space. This Edition: current; Page: [447]
property must be, expressly or by implication, a part of any sufficient
account we can give of the concept which experience has left in our
minds. But a straight line, and this property of it, become known to us
simultaneously, and from the same source. When M. Taine goes on to claim
for the first principles of other sciences—for instance, of mechanics—a
similar origin and evidence to what he claims for those of geometry, and
on the strength of that evidence attributes to them an absolute truth,
valid for the entire universe, and independent of the limits of
experience, he falls into what seem to us still greater fallacies;
partly, as we think, by confounding the two meanings of the word
Same—Identity, and Exact Similarity. But of this we must leave M.
Taine’s readers to judge. The merits of his book are such as to command
an unprejudiced consideration of that small part of it in which,
according to our individual judgment, he has been deserted by that
perception of the true conditions of scientific evidence which has
guided him through the greater part of his course. The book deserves to
be, and we hope will be, universally read by real students of
psychology.

Edition: current; Page: [448] Edition: current; Page: [449]


BERKELEY’S LIFE AND WRITINGS
 1871

Edition: current; Page: [450]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Fortnightly Review, n.s. X (Nov., 1871), 505-24, where the title is
footnoted: “ ‘The Works of George Berkeley, D.D., formerly Bishop of
Cloyne, including many of his writings hitherto unpublished. With
Prefaces, Annotations, his Life and Letters, and an Account of his
Philosophy.’ By Alexander Campbell Fraser, M.A., Professor of Logic and
Metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh. In four vols., 8vo. Oxford,
at the Clarendon Press. 1871.” Signed “J. S. Mill.” The essay was
reprinted in the posthumous 4th vol. of Dissertations and Discussions
(London: Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer, 1875), 154-87. Identified in
JSM’s bibliography as “An article on Berkeley’s Life and Writings, in
the Fortnightly Review for November 1871” (MacMinn, 101). There is no
copy of the essay in JSM’s library, Somerville College.

For comment on the composition of the essay and related matters, see the
Introduction and the Textual Introduction, xlv-xlviii and xcii above.

Edition: current; Page: [451]


Berkeley’s Life and Writings

professor fraser, and the University of Oxford, have done a good service
to philosophy, in recalling the attention of students to the writings of
a great man, by the publication of a new, and the first complete,
edition of his works. Every tiro in metaphysics is familiar with the
name of Berkeley, and thinks himself perfectly well acquainted with the
Berkeleian doctrines: but they are known, in most cases, so far as known
at all, not from what their author, but from what other people, have
said of them, and are consequently, by the majority of those who think
they know them, crudely conceived, and their most characteristic
features misunderstood. Though he was excelled by none who ever wrote on
philosophy in the clear expression of his meaning, and discrimination of
it from what he did not mean, scarcely any thinker has been more
perseveringly misapprehended, or has been the victim of such persistent
ignoratio elenchi; his numerous adversaries having generally occupied
themselves in proving what he never denied, and denying what he never
asserted. If the facilities afforded by Professor Fraser’s labours
induce those who are interested in philosophy or in the history of
philosophy to study Berkeley’s speculations as they issued from his own
mind, we think it will be recognised that of all who, from the earliest
times, have applied the powers of their minds to metaphysical inquiries,
he is the one of greatest philosophic genius: though among these are
included Plato, Hobbes, Locke, Hartley, and Hume; Descartes, Spinoza,
Leibnitz, and Kant. For, greatly as all these have helped the progress
of philosophy, and important as are the contributions of several of them
to its positive truths, of no one of them can it be said as of Berkeley,
that we owe to him three first-rate philosophical discoveries, each
sufficient to have constituted a revolution in psychology, and which by
their combination have determined the whole course of subsequent
philosophical speculation; discoveries, too, which were not, like the
achievements of many other distinguished thinkers, merely refutations of
error, and removal of obstacles to sound thinking, but were this and
much more also, being all of them entitled to a permanent place among
positive truths. These discoveries are—

1. The doctrine of the acquired perceptions of sight: that the most
important part of what our eyes inform us of, and in particular
externality, Edition: current; Page: [452] distance, and magnitude, are
not direct perceptions of the sense of sight, but judgments or
inferences, arrived at by a rapid interpretation of natural signs; the
signification of which signs is taught to us neither by instinct nor
reason, but by experience.

2. The non-existence of abstract ideas; and the fact that all the
general or class notions by means of which we think or reason, are
really, whether we know it or not, concrete ideas of individual objects.

3. The true nature and meaning of the externality which we attribute to
the objects of our senses: that it does not consist in a substratum
supporting a set of sensible qualities, or an unknown somewhat, which,
not being itself a sensation, gives us our sensations, but consists in
the fact that our sensations occur in groups, held together by a
permanent law, and which come and go independently of our volitions or
mental processes.

The first-mentioned of these three speculations was the earliest great
triumph of analytic psychology over first appearances (dignified in some
systems by the name of Natural Beliefs); and at once afforded a model
and set an example to subsequent analysts.

The second corrected a misconception which darkened the whole theory of
the higher operations of intellect, making impossible any real progress
in the analysis of those operations until the error had been got rid of.
The Conceptualists stopped the way in philosophy, as at an earlier
period the Realists had done. Berkeley refuted them, and, while adopting
what was true in the doctrines of Nominalism, laid the foundation of a
theory of the action of the mind in general reasoning, far ahead of
anything which the Nominalists had arrived at.

Thirdly and lastly, the speculations of Berkeley concerning our notion
of the external world, besides their psychological importance as an
analysis of perception, were the most memorable lesson ever given to
mankind in the great intellectual attainment of not believing without
evidence. From that time a new canon of belief, and standard of proof,
were given to thinkers, on all the abstruser subjects of philosophical
inquiry.

The three together have made Berkeley the turning-point of the higher
philosophy in modern times. As a matter of historical fact, this admits
of no dispute. Psychology and metaphysics before and after Berkeley
differ almost like ancient and modern history, or ancient and modern
physics. His first two discoveries have been the starting-point of the
true analytic method of studying the human mind, of which they alone
have rendered possible the subsequent developments; while his reasonings
on Matter have confessedly decided the direction of all succeeding
metaphysical thought, alike in those who accepted, wholly or partially,
the doctrine of Berkeley, and in those who fought against it.

When to all this it is added that, in mere literary style, he can take
rank Edition: current; Page: [453] among the best writers of an age not
unjustly regarded as in that respect the great age of English prose
literature, there is reason enough that a knowledge of his doctrines
should be sought in his own works, and that the present edition of them
should not rest idly on library shelves, but should be part of the
familiar reading of all serious students of the philosophy or history of
the human mind.

In reading Berkeley’s writings as a connected whole, one is forcibly
struck with the completeness with which all his characteristic doctrines
had been wrought out in his mind, before he gave publicity to any of
them. In the very interesting common-place book (or rather note-book)
kept by Berkeley when a student at the University of Dublin, and which
Professor Fraser has had the good fortune and merit of bringing to
light,[*] every opinion distinctive of Berkeley is already found, even
down to his points of dispute with the mathematicians; and found, not in
germ merely, but almost as complete in point of mere thought, as in any
of his subsequent writings. What is called his idealism, or disbelief in
Matter, had not only been reached by him, but had become a fixed habit
of thought at that early age. This fact is not without psychological
interest, as explaining the sincere astonishment manifested in many
passages of his writings, that his interpretation of sensible phenomena
should not, as soon as understood, be seen to be the self-evident and
common-sense view of them. Such examples of the mental law—that a mode
of representing things to ourselves with which we have grown familiar,
however opposed it may be to common opinion, tends to become, in our own
minds, apparently self-evident—should not, when they come before us, be
dismissed as the eccentricities of an individual, but should make us
reflect how much more likely it is that the common opinion itself may
also be indebted for its apparent self-evidence to its still greater
degree of familiarity, often unbroken by the suggestion, even to fancy,
of anything contradictory to it.

The doctrine of Berkeley’s first psychological work, the Essay towards a
New Theory of Vision,[†] seems, and indeed is, quite independent of
immaterialism; and has been accepted by the great majority of subsequent
psychologists, most of whom have adopted a hostile attitude towards his
idealism. But, though he published the theory of the acquired
perceptions of sight before his main doctrine (which it only preceded by
a year), in his own mind there was an intimate connection between them.
For, the form in which he liked to represent to himself those visual
appearances of linear and aërial perpective, and those muscular
sensations attending movements of the globes of the eyes, which, being
interpreted, inform us of Edition: current; Page: [454] tangible
distance and magnitude, was that of a language in which God speaks to
us, and the meaning of which, derived solely from his will, is taught to
us, not by direct instruction, but by experience. Now, Berkeley’s
idealism was an extension of this notion to the whole of our bodily
sensations. As considered by him, all these are the direct act of God,
who by his divine power impresses them on our minds without the
intervention of any passive external substance, and who has established
among them those constant relations of co-existence and successions
required for our guidance in life, which suggest to us the unfounded
idea of objects external to us, other than minds or spirits. The
doctrine of the Essay on Vision might be conceived as a first step
towards this system, and derived, no doubt, an additional recommendation
to Berkeley from fitting so well into it; but in itself it rests on
evidence strictly its own, and is equally compatible with either opinion
as to the externality and substantiality of physical nature.
Accordingly, it received almost unanimous assent from philosophers of
both opinions, until, in our time, some unsuccessful attempts have been
made to overthrow it. Among physiologists, indeed, many have remained
strangers to it; for physiologists have had in full measure the failing
common to specialists of all classes: they have been bent upon finding
the entire theory of the phenomena they investigate within their own
speciality, and have too often turned a deaf ear to any explanation of
them drawn from other sources.

And here, since the question of the acquired perceptions of sight has of
late been called up for rehearing, it is pertinent to remark, that the
evidence of the doctrine is of that positive and irrefragable character
which cannot often be obtained in psychology; it amounts to a complete
induction. In general, the analytic argument by which states of
consciousness, supposed to be original, are proved to be acquired, is of
the nature of negative evidence. It is shown that mental laws exist
which would account for their being acquired; that the known facts are
consistent with the supposition of their having been so acquired; and it
is maintained, with reason, that when a phenomenon may have been, and
was even antecedently likely to be, produced by known causes, there is
no warrant for ascribing their existence to a distinct principle in
nature. But the case of the acquired perceptions of sight does not
require this negative argument. It rests on positive experiment. It did
so, even before its corroboration by the direct evidence of Cheselden’s
and Nunneley’s patients.[*] The signs by which, according to the theory,
we judge of distance and magnitude, are the proportion of the Edition:
current; Page: [455] visual field which the image occupies, the
clearness or indistinctness of its outline, the brightness or faintness
of its colours, the number of visible objects which seem to intervene,
and the amount of muscular sensation experienced in making the eyes
converge so that they both point to the object. Now the connection of
all these things with our perceptions of distance and magnitude by the
eye, is proved by the same evidence which proves the connection between
other causes and their effects: viz., when the causes are present, the
effects follow; when the causes are absent, the effects do not take
place; and when the causes are altered, the effects are altered. Thus,
when we look at a terrestrial object through a telescope, the merely
optical effect of the instrument is, that the image occupies a larger
portion of the field of vision than when we look at the object with the
naked eye; and because of this, we cannot help thinking that we see it
larger, and because larger, therefore nearer, than with the unassisted
sight. In a hazy atmosphere, when the image of a mountain reaches us
fainter in colour and with a less definite outline than at other times,
we seem to see it farther off, and therefore (since the size of the
image is the same as usual) more lofty, than we know it to be. The
reverse takes place in a peculiarly clear atmosphere, when all distant
objects appear nearer and smaller than at other times. When none of the
criteria supposed in the theory are present, we do not see distance from
us at all; as in the case of the heavenly bodies, of the distances of
which we have no perception, and all of which, therefore, appear equally
distant. We are also without perception of their magnitude, saving that
those which produce the largest image in the eye appear the largest, and
that all of them appear larger when near the horizon than when at a
greater elevation, partly because the images are less bright, and partly
because they are seen across a multitude of objects, while in the more
elevated position no object of known distance intervenes between us and
them.* In all these cases, the difference is not in our conscious
judgments, but in our apparent perceptions. The conscious judgment often
Edition: current; Page: [456] does not share in the illusion. The man or
the tree that we look at through the telescope is of a size and distance
which may be accurately, and is always approximately, known; and the
knowledge is not in the least shaken by any number of observations with
the telescope. Yet we cannot express what we know to be an untrue
appearance, in any less strong terms than by saying that we seem to see
the things as we know them not to be. These experiments fulfil the
conditions of a true induction. That what seems perception is a rapid
interpretation of signs, is not a matter of doubtful argument, but rests
on the same evidence, both in kind and in degree, as the truths of
physical science.

The only part of this subject which is still really open to discussion,
is the precise nature of the visual signs by which we discern extension
in two dimensions, and plane figures, and of the relation between those
signs and the facts which they signify. Much argument has been expended,
we are far from saying uselessly, in maintaining that we must certainly
have, by the mere sense of sight, some perception of superficial
extension and figure. But these arguments in no way touch Berkeley’s
theory; since he admits that we have distinctive impressions of sight
corresponding to differences of tactual extension and figure, which
impressions we may call, if we please, and he himself often does call
(for want of a better designation), visible extension and figure. We
could not be made aware by the sign, of differences in the things
signified, unless there were concomitant differences in the sign itself.
But Berkeley’s position is, that visible extension and figure, or what
we choose to call by those names, have nothing in common with the
tactual, or what we consider as the real, extension and figure which
they serve to indicate; that the tie between them is entirely arbitrary,
derived from the appointment of God; and that, far from visible
extension and tactual extension being the same quality, we never should
have suspected that there was any connection between them if experience
had not disclosed it. In his opinion, a person born blind, and
afterwards, when grown up, made to see, would not at first, on being
shown a cube and a sphere, know whether the one or the other is the cube
or sphere already known to him by touch. And this opinion is borne out
by the best recorded instances. But the theory does not need this
extreme conclusion; for though visible extension or figure may have, and
indeed can have, no positive resemblance to tactual, there may be
between them an analogy, or resemblance of relations—that is, the parts
of the one may have mutual relations resembling those between the parts
of the other. For example, both the visible and the tangible cube have
corners; a sort of singular points, which do not exist in either the
visible or the tangible sphere; and this similarity of relations might
cause a person born blind, and afterwards couched, to suspect (though he
could not at first know) that the visible cube, if it corresponds to
anything tangible, corresponds to a tangible cube Edition: current;
Page: [457] rather than to a tangible sphere. This analogy, however,
does not seem to have afforded any guidance either to Cheselden’s
patient or to Nunneley’s.

The originality of Berkeley is not so complete in this, the first of his
three distinctive doctrines, as in the other two. The doctrine has been,
by all who followed him, traced up to his Essay, in which it was for the
first time pressed home, and defended against objections, so as to gain
it admission among established truths.[*] But he was not the first
thinker to whom the idea had presented itself. As pointed out by
Professor Fraser,[†] not only had Malebranche, with whose philosophy
Berkeley was familiar, made considerable approaches to it, but the
fundamental doctrine is stated, in terms which Berkeley himself might
have subscribed to, in a passage of Locke’s essay, first inserted in the
fourth edition, and a part of which is quoted by Berkeley in his
treatise. Locke himself not improbably received the idea from his friend
Molyneux, to whom is due even the illustration from the sphere and
cube.[‡] Berkeley, therefore, has not the merit of the conception; but
he has that of raising it from a surmise to a scientific truth.

It also deserves remark, that the impossibility of seeing distance from
the eye (inasmuch as, whether great or small, it projects but one point
on the retina)—though often supposed to be one of the principal
novelties in Berkeley’s theory—neither was, nor professed to be, a
novelty, but was assumed by him, in the very beginning of his Essay, as
an admitted truth. The writers on optics had already discerned thus
much; but the error into which they had fallen, and which it was the aim
of Berkeley to correct, was, that we judge of distances by a necessary
inference of reason, from geometrical considerations which, as Berkeley
says with truth, we are totally unconscious of, and which the great
majority of mankind know nothing about. The whole stress of his argument
is directed to showing that the inference is not one of reason, but of
empirical association, and that the connection between our impressions
of sight and the facts they indicate can be discovered only by direct
experience. It is this which makes Berkeley’s analysis of vision the
leading and model example of the analytic psychology. The power of the
law of association in giving to artificial combinations the appearance
of ultimate facts was then for the first time made manifest.

The second of Berkeley’s great contributions to philosophy—his theory of
general thought—is, that it is carried on, not, as even Locke imagined,
by means of general or abstract ideas, but by ideas of individuals,
serving as representatives of classes. All ideas, it was maintained by
Berkeley, are Edition: current; Page: [458] concrete and individual,
which yet is no hindrance to our arriving, by means of them, at truths
which are general. When, for example, we prove the properties of
triangles, the idea in our mind is not, as Locke supposed, the abstract
idea of a triangle which is nothing but a triangle—which is neither
equilateral, isosceles, nor scalene—but the concrete idea of some
particular triangle, from which, nevertheless, we may conclude to all
other triangles, if we have taken care to use no premises but such as
are true of any triangle whatever. This doctrine, which is now generally
received, though perhaps not always thoroughly comprehended, was
undoubtedly, like that of the acquired perceptions of sight, intimately
connected in Berkeley’s mind with his ideal theory; for he regarded the
notion of matter, apart from sensations in a mind, as the supreme
instance of that absurdity, an abstract idea. As in the theory of
vision, so in this, Berkeley broke the neck of the problem. He for the
first time saw to the bottom of the Nominalist and Realist controversy,
and established the fact that all our ideas are of individuals; though
he left it to his successors to point out the exact nature of the
psychological machinery (if the expression may be allowed) by which
general names do their work without the help of general ideas. The
solution of this, as of so many other difficulties, lies in the
connotation of general names. A name, though common to an indefinite
multitude of individual objects, is not, like a proper name, devoid of
meaning; it is a mark for the properties, or for some of the properties,
which belong alike to all these objects, and with these common
properties it is associated in a peculiarly close and intimate manner.
Now—though the name calls up, and cannot help calling up, in addition to
these properties, others in greater or smaller number which do not
belong to the whole class, but to the one or more individual members of
it which, for the time being, are serving as mental types of the
class—these other ingredients are accidental and changeable; so that the
idea actually called up by the class name, though always that of some
individual, is an idea in which the properties that the name is a mark
of are made artificially prominent, while the others, varying from time
to time, and not being attended to, are thrown into the shade. What had
been mistaken for an abstract idea, was a concrete image, with certain
parts of it fluctuating (within given limits) and others fixed, these
last forming the signification of the general name; and the name, by
concentrating attention on the class-attributes, prevents the intrusion
into our reasoning of anything special to the individual object which in
the particular case is pictured in the mind.*

Edition: current; Page: [459]
The third of Berkeley’s distinctive doctrines, and that by which his
name is best known, is his denial of Matter, or rather of Matter as
defined by philosophers; for he always maintained that his own opinion
is nearer to the common belief of mankind than the doctrine of
philosophers is. Philosophers, he says, consider matter to be one thing,
and our sensible impressions, called ideas of sense, another: they
believe that what we perceive are only our ideas, while the Matter which
lies under them and impresses them upon us is the real thing. The
vulgar, on the contrary, believe that the things they perceive are the
real things, and do not believe in any hidden thing lying underneath
them. And in this I, Berkeley, differ with the philosophers, and agree
with the vulgar, for I believe that the things we perceive are the real
things, and the only things, except minds, that are real. But then he
held with the philosophers, and not with the vulgar, that what we
directly perceive are not external objects, but our own ideas; a notion
which the generality of mankind never dreamed of. Accordingly, at the
conclusion of his fullest and clearest exposition of his own doctrine
(the Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous), Berkeley says that the
truth is at present “shared between the vulgar and philosophers: the
former being of opinion that those things they immediately perceive are
the real things; and the latter, that the things immediately perceived
are ideas which exist only in the mind.”*

It was enough for Berkeley to say, and this he was fully justified in
saying, that he did not deny the validity of perception, nor of
consciousness; that he affirmed the reality of all that either the
vulgar or philosophers really perceive by their senses, and denied only
what was not a perception, but a rapid and unconscious inference, like
the inference which is mistaken for perception when we judge of
externality and distance by the eye; with the difference, however, that
in this last case the inference is legitimate, having experience to rest
upon, while in the case of matter there is no ground in experience or in
anything else for regarding the sensations we are conscious of as signs
of the presence of anything, except potentialities of other sensations.
Berkeley might say with truth, and in his own language he did say, that
he agreed with the common opinion of mankind in all that they distinctly
realise to themselves under the notion of matter. For he agreed in
recognising in the impressions of sense a permanent element, which does
not cease to exist in the intervals between our sensations, and which is
entirely independent of our own individual mind (though not of all
mind). And he was quite right in maintaining that this is all that goes
to make up the positive notion which mankind have of material objects.
The point at which he diverged from them was where they add to this
positive notion a Edition: current; Page: [460] negative one—viz., that
these objects are not mental, or such as can only exist in a mind.
Without including this, it is impossible to give a correct account of
the common notion of matter; and on this point an unmistakeable
difference existed between Berkeley and the common mind. It was
competent to Berkeley to maintain that this part of the common notion is
an illusion; and he did maintain this, in our opinion successfully. He
was not equally successful in showing how the illusion is produced, and
in what manner it grows into a delusion. He gives as a sufficient
explanation “that men knowing they perceived several ideas, whereof they
themselves were not the authors—as not being excited from within, nor
depending on the operation of their wills—this made them maintain those
ideas or objects of perception had an existence independent of and
without the mind, without ever dreaming that a contradiction was
involved in those words.”* It is not surprising that this explanation
should not be accepted as sufficient. For our thoughts, also, do not
always depend on our own will; and therefore, on this theory, our
thoughts, as well as our sense-perceptions, should sometimes be
considered to be external to us. Berkeley escapes from this difficulty
by greatly exaggerating the dependence of the thoughts upon the will.†
He also adds, as another distinction between sensations and thoughts,
that the former are “not excited from within.” But the very notions of
without and within, in reference to our mind, involve belief in
externality, and cannot, therefore, serve to account for the belief.
Berkeley left this part of his theory to be completed by his successors.
It remained for them to show how easily and naturally, when a single
sensation of sight or sound indicates the potential presence, at our
option, of all the other sensations of a complex group, this latent
though present possibility of a host of sensations not felt, but
guaranteed by experience, comes to be mistaken for a latent cause of the
sensations we actually feel; especially when the possibilities, unlike
the actual sensations, are found to be common to us with other minds.
This has been shown, perhaps more fully and explicitly than ever before,
in the present generation. That it could not be so distinctly pointed
out by Berkeley, was partly because he had not thoroughly realised the
fact, that the permanent element in our perceptions is only a
potentiality of sensations not actually felt. He saw indeed, quite
clearly, that to us the external object is nothing but such a
potentiality. “The table I write on,” he says in the Principles of Human
Knowledge, “I say exists, that is, I see and feel it; and if I were out
of my study I should say it existed—meaning thereby that if I was in my
study I might perceive it, or Edition: current; Page: [461] that some
other spirit does perceive it.”* But in itself the object was, in his
theory, not merely a present potentiality, but a present actual
existence, only its existence was in a mind—in the Divine Mind. This is
the positive side of his theory, not so generally known or attended to
as the negative side, and which involves, we think, some serious logical
errors.

It must here be observed, that Berkeley was not content with maintaining
that the existence of a material substratum is neither perceived by the
senses, nor proved by reason, nor necessary to account for the
phenomena, and is therefore, by the rules of sound logic, to be
rejected. He thought that it could be disproved. He considered the
notion of matter to involve a contradiction: and it was true that the
notion as defined by many philosophers did so. For their definition of
matter affirmed it to be purely passive and inert; yet they regarded
material objects as the exciting causes of our sensations. There was no
refuting Berkeley when he said that what is passive and inert cannot
cause or excite anything. To the notion of philosophers that the causes
of our sensations might be “the configuration, number, motion, and size
of corpuscles,” he replied by an appeal to consciousness. Extension,
figure, and motion, he said, are ideas, existing only in the mind; “but
whoever shall attend to his ideas, whether of sense or reflection, will
not perceive in them any power or activity; there is, therefore, no such
thing contained in them. A little attention will discover to us that the
very being of an idea implies passiveness and inertness in it, insomuch
that it is impossible for an idea to do anything, or, strictly speaking,
to be the cause of anything. Whence it plainly follows that extension,
figure, and motion cannot be the cause of our sensations.”† From this he
deduces that as our sensations must have a cause, and as this cannot be
other sensations (or ideas), and as there exists no physical thing
except sensations (or ideas), the cause of our sensations must be a
spirit. He thus anticipates the doctrine of which so much use has been
made by later philosophers of a school opposed to his own; that nothing
can be a cause, or exert power, but a mind.

It would have been well if the thinker who was almost the founder and
creator of the Experience philosophy of mind, had contented himself with
(in the language of Kant) a criticism of experience—with distinguishing
what is and what is not a subject of it: instead of, as we find him
here, dispensing with experience, by an à priori argument from intuitive
consciousness. For it is in vain to consult consciousness about the
existence of a power. Powers are not objects of consciousness. A power
is not a concrete entity, which we can perceive or feel, but an abstract
name for a Edition: current; Page: [462] possibility; and can only be
ascertained by seeing the possibility realised. Intuitive perception
tells us the colour, texture, &c., of gunpowder, but what intuition have
we that it can blow up a house? True it is that all we can observe of
physical phenomena is their constancies of co-existence, succession, and
similitude. Berkeley had the merit of clearly discerning this
fundamental truth, and handing down to his successors the true
conception of that which alone the study of physical nature can consist
in. He saw that the causation we think we see in nature is but
uniformity of sequence. But this is not what he considers real causation
to be. No physical phenomenon, he says, can be an efficient cause; but
our daily experience proves to us that minds, by their volitions, can
be, and are, efficient causes. Let us be thankful to Berkeley for the
half of the truth which he saw, though the remainder was hidden from him
by that mist of natural prejudice from which he had cleared so many
other mental phenomena. No one, before Hume, ventured to think that this
supposed experience of efficient causation by volitions is as mere an
illusion as any of those which Berkeley exploded, and that what we
really know of the power of our own volitions is only that certain facts
(reducible, when analysed, to muscular movements) immediately follow
them. Berkeley proceeded to argue, that since our sensations must be
caused by a mind, they must be given to us by the direct action of the
Divine Mind, without the employment of an unintelligible inert substance
as an intermediate link. Having no efficacy as a means, this passive
substance could only intervene, if at all, not as a cause, but as an
occasion, determining the Divine Being to give us the sensations: a
doctrine actually held by Malebranche and other Cartesians, but to
Berkeley inadmissible, since what need can the Deity have of such a
reminder? Indeed, Malebranche admitted that on his theory there would be
no necessity for believing in this superfluous wheel in the machinery,
if its existence had not been, as he supposed it to be, expressly
affirmed in Scripture. Therefore, thought Berkeley, all that is termed
perception of material objects is the direct action of God upon our
minds, and no substance but spirit has any concern in it.

But Berkeley did not stop here. That which is the immediate object of
perception according to previous philosophers, and the sole object
according to Berkeley, was our ideas—a much-abused term, never more
unhappily applied than when it was given as a name to sensations and
possibilities of sensation. These ideas (argued Berkeley) are admitted
to have a permanent existence, contrasted with the intermittence of
actual sensations; and an idea can have no existence except in a mind.
They exist in our own minds only while we perceive them, and in the
minds of other men only while those other men perceive them; how then is
their existence sustained when no man perceives them? By their
permanently existing in the mind of Edition: current; Page: [463] God.
This appeared to Berkeley so conclusive an argument for the existence of
a Supreme Mind, that it might well take the place of all the other
evidences of natural theology. There must be a Deity, because, if there
were not, there would be no permanent lodging-place for physical nature;
since it has no existence out of a mind, and does not constantly and
continuously exist in any finite mind. And he sincerely believed that
this argument put a final extinguisher upon “atheism and scepticism.”[*]
All that we perceive must be in a mind, and when no finite being is
perceiving it, there is only the Divine Mind for it to abide in. This
quaint theory presents a distant and superficial resemblance to Plato’s
doctrine of ideas; and in Siris,[†] which in its metaphysical part
contains the latest of Berkeley’s statements of his opinion, he presses
Plato and the Platonists (who, as Coleridge says, should rather be
called the Plotinists)[‡] into the service of his theory; leading
Professor Fraser to believe that the theory itself had undergone
modifications, and had been developed in his later years into something
more nearly akin to Realism.[§] To our mind the passages in Siris do not
convey this impression. There is a wide chasm between Berkeley’s
doctrine and Plato’s, and we do not believe that Berkeley ever stepped
over it. The Platonic Ideas were self-existent and immaterial, but were
as much external to the Divine Mind as to the human. The gods, in their
celestial circuits, so imaginatively depicted in the Phædrus, lived in
the perpetual contemplation of these Ideas, but were neither the
authors, nor were their minds the seat and habitation of them; their
sole privilege above mankind was that of never losing sight of them.
Moreover Plato’s Ideas were not, like Berkeley’s, identified with the
common objects of sense, but were studiously and most broadly
distinguished from them, as being the imperishable prototypes of those
great and glorious attributes—beauty, justice, knowledge, &c.—of which
some distant and faint likeness may be perceived in the noblest only of
terrestrial things. We see no signs that Berkeley ever drew nearer to
these opinions; and it seems to us that his citations of the Platonists
were not an adoption of their doctrines, but an attempt to show that
they had, in a certain sense, made an approximation to his, at least to
the extent of throwing off the vulgar opinions.

The part of Berkeley’s theory on which he grounded what he deemed the
Edition: current; Page: [464] most cogent argument for a Deity, is
obviously the weak and illogical part of it. While showing that our
sensations, equally with our thoughts, are but phenomena of our own
mind, he recognised, with the rest of the world, a permanent element in
the sensations which does not exist in the thoughts; but he had an
imperfect apprehension of what that permanent element is. He supposed
that the actual object of a sensible perception, though, on his own
showing, only a group of sensations, and suspended so far as we are
concerned when we cease to perceive it, comes back literally the same
the next time it is perceived by us; and, being the same, must have been
kept in existence in another mind. He did not see clearly that the
sensations I have to-day are not the same as those I had yesterday,
which are gone, never to return; but are only exactly similar; and that
what has been kept in continuous existence is but a potentiality of
having such sensations, or, to express it in other words, a law of
uniformity in nature, by virtue of which similar sensations might and
would have recurred, at any intermediate time, under similar conditions.
These sensations, which I did not have, but which experience teaches me
that I might have had at any time during the intermission of my actual
sensations, are not a positive entity subsisting through that time: they
did not exist as sensations, but as a guaranteed belief; implying
constancy in the order of phenomena, but not a spiritual substance for
the phenomena to dwell in when not present to my own mind. Professor
Fraser, in several of his annotations, expresses the opinion that
Berkeley did not mean, when a sensation comes back after an interval,
that it is numerically the same, but only that it is the same in kind.
But if the same only in kind, how can it require to be kept individually
in existence during the interval? When the momentary sensation has
passed away, the occurrence, after a time, of another and exactly
similar sensation, does not imply any permanent object, mental any more
than material, to keep up an identity which does not really exist. If
Berkeley thought that what we feel is retained in actual, as
distinguished from potential, existence, when we are no longer feeling
it, he cannot have thought that it is nothing more than a sensation. And
in truth, by giving it the ambiguous and misleading name Idea, he does
leave an opening for supposing it to be more than a sensation. His
Ideas, which he supposes to be what we perceive by our senses, are
nothing different, and are not represented by him as anything different,
from our sensations: he frequently uses the words as synonymous: yet he
doubtless would have seen the absurdity of maintaining that the
sensation of to-day can be really the same as the sensation of
yesterday, but he saw no absurdity in affirming this of the idea. By
means of this word he gives a kind of double existence to the objects of
sense: they are, according to him, sensations, and contingencies, or
permanent possibilities, of sensation, and yet they are also something
else; they are our purely mental perceptions, Edition: current; Page:
[465] and yet they are independent objects of perception as well; though
immaterial, they exist detached from the individual mind which perceives
them, and are laid up in the Divine Mind as a kind of repository, from
which it almost seems that God must be supposed to detach them when it
is his will to impress them on us, since Berkeley rejects the doctrine
of Malebranche, that we actually contemplate them in the Divine Mind.
This illogical side of Berkeley’s theory was the part of it to which he
himself attached the greatest value; and he would have been much grieved
if he had foreseen the utter neglect of his favourite argument for
Theism. For it was for this, above all, that he prized his immaterial
theory. Indeed, the war against freethinkers was the leading purpose of
Berkeley’s career as a philosopher.*

Besides Berkeley’s properly metaphysical writings, some notice must be
taken of his strictly polemical performances—his attacks on the
freethinkers, and on the mathematicians. The former controversy pervades
more or less all his writings, and is the special object of the longest
of them, the series of dialogues entitled Alciphron, or the Minute
Philosopher.[*] Of this it may be said with truth, that were it not the
production of so eminent a man, it would have little claim to serious
attention. As a composition, Edition: current; Page: [466] indeed, it
has great merit; and, together with the dialogues on Matter, entitle
Berkeley to be regarded as the writer who, after Plato, has best managed
the instrument of controversial dialogue. The opinions, however, which
he puts into the mouths of freethinkers are mostly such as no one would
now think worth refuting, for the excellent reason that nobody holds
them; it may be permitted to doubt whether they were even then held by
any one worth answering. The freethinkers in the dialogues are two in
number—Alciphron, who is intended to represent a disciple of
Shaftesbury; and Lysicles, a follower of Mandeville, or rather a man of
pleasure who avails himself of Mandeville in defending his own way of
life. Alciphron stands for sentimental, Lysicles for sensual infidelity;
the latter (with whom Alciphron also at first seemed to agree) denying
all moral distinctions, and professing a doctrine of pure selfishness.
Now Mandeville himself did neither of these, nor are such doctrines
known to have been ever openly professed, even by those who, so far as
they dared, acted on them.* It is most likely that Berkeley painted
freethinkers from no actual acquaintance with them, and in the case of
“sceptics and atheists”[*] without any authentic knowledge of their
arguments; for few, if any, writers in his time avowed either scepticism
or atheism, and, before Hume, nobody of note had attempted, even as an
intellectual exercise, to set out the case on the atheistical side. Like
most other defenders of religion in his day, though we regret to have it
to say of a man of his genius and virtues, Berkeley made no scruple of
imputing atheism on mere surmise—to Hobbes, for example, who never
speaks otherwise than as a believer in God, and even in Christianity;
and to the “god-intoxicated” Spinoza.[†] We may judge that he replied to
what he supposed to be in the minds of infidels, rather than to what
they anywhere said; and, in consequence, his replies generally miss the
mark. Indeed, with the exception of his own special argument for Theism,
already commented upon, he has much more to say for the usefulness of
religion than for its truth; and even on that he says little more than
what is obvious on the surface. A noticeable thing, not only in his
controversy with the freethinkers, but through all his miscellaneous
writings, is the firm persuasion he expresses of the spread and growth
not only of religious unbelief, but, in addition to that, of immorality
of all kinds, from Edition: current; Page: [467] the dissipations and
profligacies of men about town, to robberies on the highway; and in
particular he held that political corruption had surpassed all previous
bounds, and that the very idea of public spirit, or regard for the
public interest, was treated with contempt. No doubt, the settlement of
the old questions which had strongly interested the multitude—while the
new ones, which date from the American and French revolutions, had not
yet come in—made the reigns of the two first Georges a time of political
indifference, always favourable to the venality of politicians. Yet,
when we carry back our thoughts to the courts and parliaments of the
last two Stuarts, or further off, to those of James I, or earlier still,
of Henry VIII, we shall not easily believe that such change as had taken
place was in any direction but that of improvement. However this be,
Berkeley was under a strong belief, more frequent than well-founded in
the case of many good men at all periods, that the nation was
degenerating; and he felt it his peremptory duty to do what in him lay
towards checking that degeneration, by reasserting and fortifying with
new arguments the old doctrines of religion and morals. It would have
greatly astonished him to be told that, as a philosopher, he would in a
future age be accounted the father of all subsequent scepticism; while,
as a moralist, he would be under the ban of the next spiritualist
revival, since, like nearly all the theologians of his time, he was
distinctly and absolutely an utilitarian—one of Paley’s sort, who
believed that God’s revealed Word is the safest guide to utility.

Berkeley’s controversy with the mathematicians has far more pith and
substance, and may even now be read with considerable profit. This, too,
was conceived by himself as part of his warfare against freethinkers,
being an argument ad hominem addressed to “an infidel mathematician,” to
the effect that as he, in mathematics, believed mysteries, and things
contrary to reason, it was not open to him to reject Christianity
because it contained mysteries above reason. The mathematical mysteries
in question were the doctrines relating to infinites, and specially
those on which the differential or infinitesimal calculus was grounded.
The conclusions arrived at by this process Berkeley did not dispute,
inasmuch as they were often confirmed by experience, and had not, in any
case, been contradicted by it; but he maintained that the rational
grounds of the theory were quite untenable, and at variance with the
boasted exactness and demonstrative character of mathematical reasoning.
And it is difficult to read, without parti pris, The Analyst,[*] and the
admirable rejoinder to its assailants, entitled A Defence of
Free-thinking in Mathematics[†] (the latter one of the finest pieces of
Edition: current; Page: [468] philosophic style in the English
language), and not to admit that Berkeley made out his case. It was not
until later that the differential calculus was placed on the foundation
it now stands on—the conception of a limit; which is the true basis of
all reasoning respecting infinitely small quantities, and, properly
apprehended, frees the doctrine from Berkeley’s objections.
Nevertheless, so deeply did those objections go into the heart of the
subject, that even after the false theory had been given up, the true
one was not (so far as we are aware) worked out completely, in language
open to no philosophical objection, by any one* who preceded the late
eminent Professor De Morgan, who combined, with the attainments of a
mathematician, those of a philosophic logician and psychologist. Though
whoever had mastered the idea of a limit could see, in a general way,
that it was adequate to the solution of all difficulties, the puzzle
arising from the conception of different orders of
differentials—quantities infinitely small, yet infinitely greater than
other infinitely small quantities—had not (to our knowledge) been
thoroughly cleared up, and the meaning that lies under those mysterious
expressions brought into the full light of reason, by any one before Mr.
De Morgan.

Berkeley was not solely a speculative philosopher and theologian; he
also wrote on things directly practical, as was to be expected from his
keen interest in the welfare of mankind, and specially of his own
Ireland. The labours and the years of life which he devoted to the
attempt to found a college at Bermuda, chiefly for the education of
missionaries—a scheme which, solely through the influence of his
personal character, got so far as to obtain a (for the time) large
subscription list, and an address from the House of Commons, followed by
the grant of a charter and a promise of £20,000 from the minister, but
which, when the fascination of his presence had been removed, was
quietly let drop—need not here be further dwelt upon. In his writings on
practical subjects there is much to commend, and a good deal to
criticise. One of them is a vindication of Passive Obedience, or the
Christian doctrine of not resisting the Supreme Power.[*] It is an
impressive lesson of tolerance, to find so great a man as Berkeley a
thoroughly convinced adherent and defender of a doctrine not only so
pernicious, but by that time so thoroughly gone by. The reader of the
tract perceives that the writer was misled by an exaggerated application
of that cardinal doctrine of morality, the importance of general rules.
As it was acknowledged that the cases in which it is right to disobey
the laws or rebel against the Government are not the rule but the
exception, Berkeley threw Edition: current; Page: [469] them out
altogether, for his moral rules admitted of no exceptions. The most
considerable and best known of his writings on practical interests is
the Querist, wherein opinions are propounded in a form to which Berkeley
was partial, that of queries. It is in this that we find his celebrated
query, “Whether, if there was a wall of brass a thousand cubits high
round this kingdom, our natives might not nevertheless live cleanly and
comfortably, till the land, and reap the fruits of it.”* The majority of
the queries, like this, are on subjects of political economy. Their
chief merits are the strong hold which the author has of the fundamental
truths, that the industry of the people is the true source of national
wealth, and luxurious expenditure a detriment to it; and the
distinctness with which he perceived, being therein much in advance of
his age, that money is not in itself wealth, but a set of counters for
computing and exchanging wealth, and, in his own words, “a ticket
entitling to power, and fitted to record and transfer this power.”[*]
Had he followed up this idea, he might have anticipated the work of Adam
Smith; but he held, apparently, to the conclusions of what is called the
mercantile system, while rejecting its premises, and seems to have
thought the consumption of foreign luxuries vastly more injurious to the
national wealth than that of luxuries produced at home.

Few of Berkeley’s writings have been so much heard of, though in our
days none, probably, so little read, as Siris—originally published under
the title of Philosophical Reflections and Inquiries concerning the
virtues of Tar-Water, and divers other subjects connected together and
arising one from another—a work which begins with tar-water and ends
with the Trinity, the intermediate space being filled up with the most
recondite speculations, physical and metaphysical. It may surprise some
persons when we say that the part of this which is best worth reading is
that which treats of tar-water. Berkeley adduces a mass of evidence,
from much experience of his own and of others, to the powers of
tar-water both in promoting health and in curing many diseases, and
thinks it probable, though without venturing to affirm, that it is an
universal medicine. All this is often supposed to be a mere delusion of
the philosopher, by those who do not know that the efficacy he ascribes
to his remedy is in part real, since creosote, one of the ingredients of
tar-water, is used with success both as a tonic and for the relief of
pain, not to mention the disinfecting and other virtues of another
ingredient, the now much talked-of carbolic acid. In any case, it is a
valuable lesson to see how great, and seemingly conclusive, a mass of
positive evidence can be produced in support of a medical opinion which
yet is not borne out, except to a very limited extent, by subsequent
Edition: current; Page: [470] experience. Having, as he thought,
established à posteriori the restorative virtues of tar-water, Berkeley,
like a philosopher as he was, endeavoured to investigate the cause, or
general principle of these virtues; but he sought for evidence both of
the possibility of a panacea, and of the probability of this being such,
in the doctrines of an erroneous, and now thoroughly exploded,
chemistry, and through them, in the mixed physical and metaphysical
theories of the ancient philosophers. One of the points he strove to
make out was, that fire is the vital force, or principle of life; having
first, as he thought, established, from his antiquated chemistry, a
peculiar connection between tar and the element of fire. But as it was
not consistent with Berkeley’s philosophy to let it be supposed that
fire, or anything except mind, could be a real agent, he ascends through
this apparently humble subject to his own highest speculations. “It is
neither acid, nor salt, nor sulphur, nor air, nor æther, nor visible
corporeal fire—much less the phantom fate or necessity—that is the real
agent, but, by a certain analysis, a regular connection or climax, we
ascend through all those mediums to a glimpse of the First Mover,
invisible, incorporeal, unextended, intellectual source of life and
being.”* And the ancient philosophers, whom he had already cited in
confirmation of his physics, are now invoked to give what support they
can to his theology, very unsuccessfully in our opinion. Professor
Fraser attaches great value to Siris, saying, that “the scanty
speculative literature of these islands in last century contains no
other work nearly so remarkable,” and that “every time we open its pages
we find fresh seeds of thought. It breathes the spirit of Plato and the
Neoplatonists in the least Platonic generation of English history since
the revival of letters.”† We confess we see in it no connection but with
what is least valuable in Plato, his mystical cosmogony, that which is
really common to him with the Neoplatonists; and while we do not think
it adds anything of the smallest value to Berkeley’s thoughts elsewhere
expressed, it overloads them with a heap of useless and mostly
unintelligible jargon, not of his own but of the Plotinists.

Professor Fraser has fulfilled the duties of an editor with intelligence
and fidelity. He has in general contented himself with explaining and
elucidating his author, and has been more sparing in comment of his own,
even in the way of defence, than might perhaps have been expected from
the valuable services of this kind which he has rendered to the
Berkeleian doctrines in other writings. The chapter, however, which he
has devoted to “The Philosophy of Berkeley,”‡ contains much useful
matter in explanation Edition: current; Page: [471] and recommendation
of Berkeley’s main thoughts, with some hints at what he deems
shortcomings, which, to be properly judged, would require much more
expansion. The biography which he has contributed, incorporating a great
number of letters of Berkeley not previously known, is a work both of
labour and of love, for which thanks are due to Professor Fraser.
Unhappily the letters, being mostly to his man of business, Mr. Thomas
Prior, do not bring to light anything very novel in the life or
character of the philosopher; but both they and the biography will be
always welcome to his admirers, by admitting them to such imperfect
acquaintance as is still obtainable with the daily life of so excellent
and eminent a man.

Edition: current; Page: [472] Edition: current; Page: [473]


GROTE’S ARISTOTLE
 1873

Edition: current; Page: [474]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Fortnightly Review, n.s. XIII (Jan., 1873), 27-50, where the title is
footnoted: “Aristotle. By George Grote. Edited by Alexander Bain,
Professor of Logic in the University of Aberdeen, and G. Croom
Robertson, Professor of Philosophy of Mind and Logic in University
College, London. In two volumes. London [: Murray], 1872.” Signed “J. S.
Mill.” The essay was reprinted in the posthumous 4th vol. of
Dissertations and Discussions (London: Longmans, Green, Reader, and
Dyer, 1875), 188-230. Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “An article on
Grote’s Aristotle in the Fortnightly Review for January 1st 1873”
(MacMinn, 101). There is no copy in JSM’s library, Somerville College.

There are, exceptionally, two complete manuscripts of the essay, one a
draft (Harvard), the other the press-copy (Library of Congress). These
have been collated with the text; in the footnoted variants “H”
indicates the Harvard manuscript; “C”, the Library of Congress
manuscript; “73”, the Fortnightly Review. The variants also give the few
places where the final text returns to a cancelled reading in the
Harvard MS. For comment on the composition of the essay and related
matters, see the Introduction and the Textual Introduction, xlii-xlv and
xcii-xciv above.

Edition: current; Page: [475]
[lf0223-11_figure_002.jpg]
The first folio of the draft MS of “Grote’s Aristotle” Houghton Library,
Harvard University

Edition: current; Page: [b]
[lf0223-11_figure_003.jpg]
The first folio of the press-copy MS of “Grote’s Aristotle” Library of
Congress

Edition: current; Page: [c]


Grote’s Aristotle

a book which shouldaperforma for Aristotle what the author of the
present volumes hadbaccomplishedb for Plato; which shouldccontainc an
accurate and exhaustive account of all his multifarious works, with a
critical appreciation of them, both from the philosophical point of view
and from the historical; would be as welcome to philosophers and
scholars as the work by which Mr. Grote expounded Plato to English
readersd; and would have been, perhaps, even more difficult to execute
with that thoroughness which alone would have contented the eminent
author. Seldom haseany literary undertaking givene more cause to lament
the shortness of human life, and the impossibility off extending beyond
the allotted limits lives valuable to mankind, than this work, in its
present unfinished condition, exhibits. For Mr. Grote’s death was not,
in the ordinarygmeaningg of the word, premature; he lived to the ripe
age of seventy-six years; but this, hishlatesth production, down to the
very chapter in which his pen was interrupted by fatal illness, shows an
undiminished vigour of intellect and perseverance of mental industry,
which raise sad thoughts of how muchigoodi work he mightjstill have
done,j if the merely animal and nutritive organs of his bodily frame had
been capable of as long akpersistencyk of life and health as the
properly human organ, the reasoning and thinking brain.lRememberingl,
however, that this ismonly one among the many inherent imperfections of
our existence on earthm, and that a work of such magnitude, commenced
after the age of seventy, wasnexceedinglyn likely never to be completed,
let us turn to the two goodly volumes which are theoresulto of the
labours of those last years, and rather rejoice that so much has been
given, and this of so excellent a quality, than mourn over what might
have been if thepconstitutionp of human life had been different.

Edition: current; Page: [476]
For the work, though unfinished, is not a mere fragment: a part only of
the task has been performed, but what is done is thoroughly done; a
portion only of the ground has been covered, but what has been built on
that portion is a completed structure in itself. The account of the
logical writings of Aristotle, and of his position as a thinker on
logic, isqcomplete; andq this includes, as is known, by far the greater
part of what is permanently valuable in his contributions to the sum of
human knowledge, as distinguished from the value, in an historical point
of view, ofr his speculations, regarded as steps in the development of
human thought. In the natural order of succession, the psychology and
metaphysics followsafters the logic; but on these time was only given to
Mr. Grote to make a commencement. Onetchapter, abruptly broken off,t is
all that he had prepared onuthese subjectsu to form part of the present
treatise. But as far as regards the mere exposition of Aristotle, apart
from criticism and comment, the blank is in a measure supplied by a full
abstract, and, in part, translation, of the six principal books of the
Metaphysica (as well as of two books of the De Cœlo,[*]v intimately
connected with them), which Mr. Grote had madew, as a helpw to himself,
not for publication, but which the editors have, very properly, printed
in an appendix. An account of Aristotle’s psychology, contributedxby
himx in 1868 to the third edition of Professor Bain’s work, The Senses
and the Intellect,[†] isyalsoy reprinted as the last chapter of the
treatise. The appendix contains two other papers, also writtenzfor two
of Mr. Bain’s treatises,[‡] and there published, in which Mr. Grote
gives hisz view of Aristotle’s doctrinesarespecting two of the principal
questions on the border ground between logic and metaphysicsa. One
isbthe questionb which was the subject of hiscchiefc controversy with
Plato, the nature of Edition: current; Page: [477] Universals; the
otherd is that of First Principles. Both essays are as thorough and as
highly finished as any part of the treatise itself. To these are now
addede compositionsfwhich, either wholly or in part, appearf for the
first time—one, a correction of the mistakes of Sir William Hamilton
respecting the relation of Aristotle to what is calledg, by the Reid and
Stewart school,g the philosophy of Common Senseh, of which philosophy
Hamilton, on very insufficient grounds, claims him as an apostleh; and
two short but valuable papers on Epicurus and on the Stoics, some
account of whom was toihave beeni included in the work on Aristotle, as
the earlierjSocraticj schools, the Megarics,kthek Cynics, and Cyrenaics
(what little is known of them) were comprehended inlthatl on Plato. The
mattermrelating to Aristotle in the appendixm, together with the lucid
expositionn of some main points of his doctrine in the two chapters
which stand as parts of the work itself, are a most valuable
contribution tootheo knowledge andpunderstandingp of Aristotle as a
psychologist and metaphysician, and will not only lighten the labour of
such as may take up the task after Mr. Grote, but willqhelp materiallyq
to guide them into the true path.rButr the greatest value of the work
willsalwayss reside in the parttof itt which is completed, the analysis
and appreciation of the treatises composing the Organon; a name and
classificationu, it must be said,u not of Aristotle’sv making, but
introduced by hiswcommentatorsw to distinguish the logical treatises,
those on thexrules and methodx of philosophizing, from theyfary greater
number which aimed atzsetting forthz some of the results of philosophy.

When Aristotle isacalled, not without justice,a the founder of logic,
this is not to be understood solely ofbthe portion of logic with which
his name is specially identified,b the doctrine of the syllogism. Of
this, however, he Edition: current; Page: [478] cwas not only the great
teacher, butc expresslydclaimed to bed the creator. In one of the few
passages of his voluminous writings whichecontain a directe reference to
himself, he declares that on this subject he had no helps, and no
precursors.fUnlikef rhetoric, on which there existedga copious body ofh
theory and precept, inherited from predecessors and accumulated by
successive traditions,g in dialectic (he says)—

iI had to begin from the beginning, and to make good the first step
myself. The process of syllogizing had never yet been analysed or
explained by any one; much less had anything been set forth about the
different applications of it in detail. I worked it out for myself,
without any assistance, by long and laborious application. . . . The
syllogism as a system and theory, with precepts founded on that theory
for demonstration and dialectic, has originated first with me. Mine is
the first step, and, therefore, a small one, though worked out with much
thought and hard labour: it must be looked at as a first step, and
judged with indulgence. You, my readers, or hearers of my lectures, if
you think that I have done as much as can fairly be required for an
initiatory start, compared with other more advanced departments of
theory, will acknowledge what I have achieved, and pardon what I have
left for others to accomplish.*

In such modest terms does Aristotle speak of what he had done for a
theory which, in the judgment even ofjso distant an age as the presentj,
he did not,kas he himself says, merelyk commence, but completed,lsol far
as completeness can be affirmed ofmam scientific doctrine. The theory,
as it came from his hands, has proved its sufficiency by the practical
rules which hen grounded on it, and which have been found to cover every
case and suffice for every purpose for which they wereointended; ando
(pexcept the easy addition of the hypothetical syllogismp) none of the
attemptsqthatq have been made, even by men of great knowledge and
ability (some of the most notable of them in our own age), to give
greater extension and precision to Edition: current; Page: [479] the
syllogistic theory, have been able to make good their claim to anyrother
value thanr that of a school exercise. Opinion, indeed, has varied,
during the two thousand and more yearssthat separate us from Aristotles,
respecting the utility of any such rules, andt of the syllogistic theory
itself. After having been long deemed the key to all science it came to
beuaccountedu a mere incumbrance, and has only of latevbecome av subject
of rational estimation. All, however, that has been discovered or
invented by modern thought has not invalidated the claim of the
syllogism to be a correct analysis of the process of reasoning by
general terms—the operation which establishes a conclusion by showing
that it comes within the scope of a generalisationwthat has alreadyw
been assented to on evidence deemedxsufficient; andx the rules grounded
on this analysis do all that rules can do to insure the correct
performance of the operation: they point out the conditionsyrequisitey
for correctness, and distinguish with scientific precision the modes of
error.zIt has, no doubt, been shown (what was never clearly seen until
lately) that the syllogism is not really a process of inference; all
that there is of inference being completed in the induction from
experience which gave us the generalisation we syllogize from. The
syllogistic process merely maintains consistency between our general
theorems from experience and our particular applications of it, and
compels us to face the whole extent of the generalisation which is
necessary to justify our inference in a given particular case. What is
called Formal Logic is the logic of consistency: and consistency is not
necessarily truth, but is one of the most essential conditions of it. A
mastery of the syllogistic logic does not necessarily make a sound
thinker, but goes far towards making a clear one; and a clear
understanding is already well advanced on the road towards soundness.z

But the merits of Aristotle in regard to logic are not confined within
this, the narrowest acceptation in which the term is used; they extend
to the widest. There are none of the operations of the intellect in the
pursuit of truth to which his services were not considerable. He cannot
indeed be credited with being the permanent legislator of any of the
other departments of logic, as he was of the syllogism. Yet it will, we
think, be found that he did as much for them as was compatible with the
very early stage Edition: current; Page: [480] which scientific studies
had then reached; for it was only after considerable trial of all the
paths whichalay open to thema, that mankind could discover whichb it is
that leads to the desired end. As Aristotle wasc far from completing any
logical theory save that of the syllogism, so heddidd not claim to have
originated any other. He says expressly that the inventor of definition
and of induction was Socrates. What exactly itewase which he intended by
these impressions to ascribe to Socrates,fwe are reduced to gather
mainly from other evidencef. We know,g both from thehvividh dramatic
representation by Plato of the mode of discussionipractised byi
Socrates, and from the direct testimony of the more commonplace
Xenophon, that it mainly consisted in attempting to ascertain “what”
each of the facts or ideas which figure in the talk of the market-place
and in thejdeliberationj of the public assembly “is;”kor,k in other
words, inla search after definitionsl. And though it is neither known,
nor at all likely, that any rules for this investigation were laid down
either by Socrates or by Plato, most of the Platonic dialogues are
practical exemplifications of it.mIn Mr. Grote’s opinion,* the induction
which Aristotle placed to the credit of Socrates, was the establishment
of definitions by generalisation from an enumeration of particulars.†m
The Platonicnpracticen of dividing down to the thing which is the
subject of inquiry,owas regardedo by Bacon as the nearest approach to a
true method of induction to be found among the ancients, because itpdid
not proceedp by simple enumeration, but by rejectiones et exclusiones
debitas[*]q—by an equal scrutiny of the instances in which the thing
sought was absent, and of those in which it was present. Butq Plato
practised this method only in inquiring into definitions: Edition:
current; Page: [481] and,rin its applicationr to that investigation,
Aristotle completelysappropriateds it; the doctrine that a definition
must be per genus et differentiam being its theoretic generalisation,
and the Predicamental Tree its paradigm.

tBut Aristotle had a much larger and juster conception of the functions
of Induction than merely this. Het did for induction theufirst great
thing thatu had to be done for it—v the only great thingwthatw could be
done for it in the then state of science; in doing which he had not, so
far as we know, been anticipated by Socrates, whilexin Plato he hadx his
chief adversary: he pointed out that induction is the ultimate ground
and evidence of allyoury knowledge. Inzsyllogizing (as he explains)z we
argueadownwarda from general truths; but the general truths which are
the ἀρχαὶ or ultimate premises of ourbsyllogismsb must beccollected from
particularc experience. His practiced, it must be admitted, seems to
modern criticsd to have beeneoftene very insufficientlyfgovernedf by his
own doctrine; but he was consistent in upholding the theory. Andghisg
recognition of ithdoes the more honourh to hisiphilosophicali
perspicacity, inasmuch as the only science in which,jat the time when he
livedj, any considerable achievement had been made, was mathematics; a
science in which the inductions that constitute the first premises are
truthskso obvious and familiar, that it is particularly easy to mistake
themk for intuitionsldirectly apprehended by the mind; and theyl are, in
fact, the example principally relied on by thosem who, down to and in
our ownntimesn, deny Aristotle’s principle. Inohiso eyes, however, the
axioms laid down in geometry, and those implied in Edition: current;
Page: [482] arithmetic, arepmerely the most obvious of our
generalisations from observation. They arep all learnt from sense:
notqmerely suggested by itq to the mind, which afterwards perceives them
to rest on a higher evidence, butr actually proved by sense. If, by one
of the schools between which philosophy is still divided, this is
imputed to him as an error, the other, and in our opinion better, school
sees in it a far-sighted anticipation of the ultimate verdict of
philosophy.

Having thus put induction in itsspropers place, as the foundation and
evidence of the truths from which all others flow, Aristotle does not
inquire further into it, nor attempt totfindt any scientific
criterionufor distinguishing good induction fromu bad. His mindvdoes not
seemv to have travelled beyond the primitive conception of
induction,wdescribedw by Bacon as “Inductio per enumerationem simplicem,
ubi non reperitur instantia contradictoria:”[*] and he probably
considered this sufficient for scientific, as he certainly did for
dialectic purposes; for, in the Topica,[†] he lays it down that if one
party in the discussion produces a number of instances in support of a
generalisation, and the other party is unable to produce any in
contradiction toxitx, he must be held to admit it. That Aristotle should
not have seen his way to the scientific tests of correct and incorrect
induction, will not be surprising, if we consider thatythose tests are
ally grounded upon the universality of the Law of Causation,zand that
this universality wasz not known nor admitted in Aristotle’satimea, nor
consideredbby him admissibleb. That the same phenomena always, without
exception,creappearc whenever a determinate set of conditions is exactly
realised, was a truth which had not dawned upon his mind;dnor had the
knowledge of nature, which at that early period had been acquired, as
yet established this uniformity of sequence as an universal, but only as
a partial truthd. Aristotle Edition: current; Page: [483] not only
believed that some ofethe sequences which we now calle laws of nature
are true invariably, and others only for the most part, butfadmittedf as
positive causes in nature two agencies of which uniformity could not in
any sense be predicated, τύχη and τὸ αὐτομάτον, chance and
spontaneity.[*]gIt can surprise no one that when the first basis of
scientific induction, the constancy of the course of nature, had been so
imperfectly laid, the rules and tests of induction which have been built
upon that basis after its soundness had been proved by three centuries
of the successful application of induction to subjects of ever
increasing intricacy and complication, could not be arrived at by
divination.g It is not, however,hquite so obvious why Aristotle couldh
not have seen as much of the matter as Bacon saw; for Bacon also lived
at a time when physical science had madei few of its modern
achievements, and such of them as it had made (those of Galileo)
hejseems to have beenj ignorant of. Accordingly Bacon, no more than
Aristotle, was able, by his mere sagacity, to arrive at the true rules
and tests of induction. But he did, by that rare sagacity, perceive that
such tests and rules must be grounded on the application to the
investigation of nature, of that comparison of affirmative and negative
instanceskto discover their point of difference,k which Socrates and
Plato had introduced and Aristotle had adopted for the investigation of
definitionsland for that onlyl.mItm may seem a great derogation from
Aristotle’snreach of thoughtn that he should have left it to Bacon to
make this step. But we should consider that though Bacon had no
experience of the success of the modern induction, he had two thousand
years’ experience of the failure of the ancient. There hadoby that time
been ample evidenceo that the results arrived at by spontaneous
generalisation frompthe instances which first offer themselves, are not
top be relied on. Such reliance wasqstill admissibleq Edition: current;
Page: [484] in Aristotle’s time. For he was the very first who put that
primitiverinduction upon its proper trialr, by using it systematically
for scientific purposes; making a vast collection of such facts
orsreputeds facts as he could procure, and trying whattcould be donet in
the way ofudirectu generalisation from them.vThe need of a more artful
method of induction was not likely tov be felt until after the natural
modewwas seen to havew failed; and it was the failure of that mode,
after an ample trial by such a man as Aristotle,xto establish
conclusions that would stand the test of practice,x that awakenedyBacon,
and not him alone,y but all the most advanced minds in an age
ofzrenewedz intellectual activity, to theaneeda of a saferband more
penetratingb inductive method.

These considerations ought to be borne in mind in judging of the
numerous cases in whichcAristotle’s particular speculations havec the
appearance of being false to his own fundamental principle, that all
knowledge isd derived from experience. In Mr. Lewes’s book on
Aristotlee(a work,fsof far as the present writer’s knowledge of
Aristotle enables him to judge, of exemplary fairness; but
which,gthoughg warmly acknowledging the great genius of Aristotle, yet
dealing chiefly with his crude physical speculations, unavoidably gives
a much stronger feeling of his defects than of his superiority),e there
are to be found abundant examples of conclusions drawn by him from
premises which, to ourheyesh, do not seem groundedion experience at all,
but oni what he himself specially warns others against—preconceptions
originating in the mind.[*] Wejdoubt notj, however, that Aristotle, if
these assumptions had been questioned, would have unhesitatingly claimed
for them the character of inductions from experience.kTo take one
instance:k he frequently assumes as a principle from whichlconclusions
may legitimatelyl be drawnmconcerningm facts, that nature always aims at
Edition: current; Page: [485] the best. Nothing, indeed, can be less
scientific, or lessnsupportedn by a true knowledge of nature, than this
generalisation; butoAristotleo would have had no difficulty in citing as
evidence of it, among other facts, all those adaptationsp(so far as then
ascertained) onp which writers on natural theologyqinsistq as marks of
benevolent design; and though he must have known of manyrfactsr
apparently pointing the other way, he could not then know how deeply
thatsother ways penetrates into the most intimate constitution of
nature, and doubtlesstbelievedt that they all admitted of explanations
which would reconcile them with the theory.uThe example we have chosen
is a rather peculiar one, and we often find him building conclusions
uponu premises the connection of which with observed fact is, to modern
apprehension, far more distantv; but wev still find him proceeding on
some analogy, or apparent analogy, to some of the experiences of sense.
These are not grounds on which he canwfairlyw be charged with abandoning
hisxfundamentalx principle. Rather, this mode of proceeding seems the
inevitable first stage of the attempt to make aybroady and far-reaching
application ofzthez principle. For it is now well understood that
scienceadoes not advance by the merea collection of materials, but by
usingbthemb, as fast as collected, incthe construction ofc provisional
generalisations, fitted to give a definite direction to further
inquiry,dand themselves destined, according to the results of fresh
inquiry, to be corrected, limited, or totally abandonedd. The first set
of provisional generalisations were naturally and properly drawn from
the most obvious facts. Generalisation “ex his tantummodo quæ præsto
sunt pronuncians,” so deservedlyecondemnede by Bacon[*]fas the final
methodf of scientific Edition: current; Page: [486] procedure, isgquite
legitimate asg its first stage; and if the provisional character ofhtheh
generalisations was lost sight of, and they were mistaken foriproved
truthsi, the responsibility does not lie with Aristotle, who tookjthe
greatest pains to enlargej the stock of facts, and whokcertainly neither
dreamed nork desired that his speculations should be accepted as
infallible. It is true, he can hardly have imagined how very far his
generalisations would prove to be from a genuine interpretation of
nature. For he did not know, nor did any one then know, that the most
familiar parts of nature are often the most intricate and complex, and
that there are none of which the ultimate lawsldiffer more widelyl from
anything which first appearances givem indication of.

nNeither let usogreatly blame Aristotleo for not having more carefully
sifted the evidence of his facts. It ispchargedp against him that in the
natural history of fishes, for example, heqsetsq down as factsrwhateverr
were told to him as such by fishermen, some of which were realsresults
ofs observation, while others weretmeret popular superstitions; but he
hadu, mostly, no meansu of distinguishing the one from the other.vHe was
forced to receive a great proportion of his information on trust. The
age of scientific specialists had not yet arrived.v Had he devoted his
time, like Mr. Buckland, to a careful personal observation of the
character and habits of fishes, he would have become,wwithoutw doubt, a
very remarkable ichthyologist; but could he have written even the
History of Animals,[*] not toxmentionx the Organon, the Ethics,[†] or
the Rhetoric?[‡] In his day, the greatest service which any one could do
to physical science, was to make the largest possible collection
ofyphysicaly facts, andzto link them together even by conjecture,
leavingz it to the future to eliminate those which the more Edition:
current; Page: [487] aattentivea observation thus directed to them did
not confirm. Aristotle did this, with an industry and often an
intelligence deserving high praise; nor is it imputable to him that a
dictum of his came to be thought, by a succession ofbgenerationsb,
better evidence of truth than the use of their eyes.

Intimately connected with his opinion respecting the foundation of all
our knowledge in sensible experience, is his view of the nature of
Universals; whichcexcited more interest and more discussion amongc those
who succeeded him than his doctrine of Induction, and contributeddmostd
to make him be considered as the founder and chief of the school of
sensible experience, in opposition to the Platonic
oreRealistic-Idealiste school. Plato, it is well known, gave great
prominence in many of his principal Dialogues, to the doctrine, that all
individual and sensible objects being in a perpetualfprocess off change,
never being, butgalwaysg becoming, there could be no knowledge, inhany
true sense of the termh, of them, but only of certain archetypes or
Forms, cognisable by intellect alone; which Formsiarei the attributes in
theirjcompletenessj, an imperfect semblance of which we recognise in the
best objects of sense. These Formsk(called by him Ideas, ἰδέαι, one of
the Greek equivalents of form)k hadl, according to him,l a separate
existence of their own, quite apart frommsense. Them gods lived in the
constant contemplation of them, whichnwas only possible ton the human
mind after a thorough training in philosophy, andocould be completeo
only in a life after death. These were the only real Entia, or beings;
the world of sense waspsomethingp half-way between Entity and
Non-Entity. Such is the doctrineqrespectingq Universals which is called,
and justly called, Platonic; though Plato also left very forcible
statements of its difficulties, and the objections to which it was
liable; coupled, however, with the declaration that in spite of all
these, unless the doctrine is admitted, Edition: current; Page: [488] no
knowledge is possible. Against this theory Aristotle carries onran
unrelaxingr polemic; and gives, in considerable detail, his reasons for
rejecting it. But, being a constructive as well as a critical thinker,
he sets up a counter theory.[*] According to this, individual objects of
sense, instead of not being Entia at all, are sosmore specially and in a
fuller degree than any other thingss. He calls them, and them alone,
First Substances. Genera and Speciestaret substances also (Second
Substances), but not self-existent, like Plato’s Forms; on the contrary,
he denies them all existence, except in, and as implicated with, some
First Substance. Attributesu, though also included among Entia, could
still less be admitted to have a separate existenceu. Without going the
length of the Nominalist doctrine, which holds nothing to be universal
but names, Aristotle takes up av middle position, analogous to that of
the modern Conceptualists;wbut differing from themw in this,
thatxwhereas they considerx Universals as notions in the mind, made up
from the world of sense by the intellect itself through a process of
abstraction,y Aristotle regarded them asz having a real external
existence;aas only perceived, not made, by the intellect; perceiveda,
however, not asbindependentb entities, but as inseparable elements of
the objects perceived by sense. The antagonism between thisctheoryc and
Plato’s,dthe two doctrines placing the seatsd of objective reality at
opposite poles, the one in individuals, the other in the highest
generalities, accounts for the character assigned to Aristotleeof beinge
the head and front of the à posteriori, as Plato isfheld to bef of the à
priori metaphysics. But it isgnoticeableg thath in the hands of
theischool that predominated in the Middle Agesi, who assuredly looked
up to Aristotle with an almost servile Edition: current; Page: [489]
deference,jhis philosophyj grew into a well-defined system of Realism,
from which it was reserved tokthinkers of a much later date to
emancipate thoughtk. Mr. Grote was of opinion that
thislmisinterpretation, as he considered it,l was in a measure owing to
the very imperfect possession of Aristotle’s writingsmbym the early
Middle Ages. In anprivaten letter quoted by the editors in their
preface,oMr. Groteo says that he should be able to show “how much the
improved views of the question of Universals depended on the fact that
more and more of the works of Aristotle, and better texts, became known
to Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas, and their successors. During the
centuries immediately succeeding Boethius, nothing of Aristotle, except
the Categories and the treatise De Interpretatione,[*] was known, and
these in a Latin translation. Most fortunately, the Categories was never
put out of sight; and it is there that the doctrine of Substantia Prima
stands clearly proclaimed.”*

But though the doctrine of Substantia Prima, in the book on the
Categories, thoroughly excludes Plato’s form of realism, that of
Substantia Secunda, which is there combined with it, afforded a basis on
which it was possible to erect anotherp realistic doctrine. Universals,
as understood by Aristotle, were not indeed, like Plato’s, extra rem,
but they were in re, and not solely in the cognising mind. The
difference, no doubt,qwas great between the two doctrinesq. As conceived
by Aristotle, universals would perish if there were no particulars to
predicate them of:

The subject, or First Substance, which can never become a predicate, is
established as the indispensable ultimate subject for all predicates; if
that disappears, all predicates disappear along with it. The particular
thus becomes the keystone of the arch whereon all universals rest.
Aristotle is indeed careful to point out a gradation in these
predicates: some are essential to the subject, and thus approach so near
to the First Substance that he calls them Second Substances; others, and
the most in number, are not thusressential. Theser last are Concomitants
or Accidents, and some of them fall so much short of complete Entity,
that he describes them as near to Non-Entia. But all of them, essential
or unessential, are alike constituents or Edition: current; Page: [490]
appendages of the First Substance or Particular Subject, and have no
reality in any other character.*

This wassa greats advance on the doctrine, that the only reality, and
the onlytpossible subject of science, existst in a sphere altogether
apart from particularsu; and it did not, like that, cultivate a disdain
of the physical details among which lies the only real road to the
discovery of the laws of nature. Butu the admission of general
substances, though only as embodied in individual substances, gavevav
loop-holewthrough which, in another shape, the realism which is a
natural outgrowth of the human mindw could creep in; and a world of
argument and discussion was found necessary again to dislodge it.
Thextendency to believe that a real thing is signified wherever there is
a real word, was in this instancex favoured by some of the leading
doctrines of Aristotle inymetaphysicy proper: especially byz two
distinctions, which run throughaalla his “Philosophia Prima”—the
analysis of every object of perception or thought into two ingredients,
Matter and Form, and the cognate distinction between Potential and
Actual being; the matter of a thing being only potentially the thing,
until the superinduction of the form makes it actually so. These forms,
which he does not call ἰδέαι, likebthose of Plato,b but εἴδη,candc which
are in reality the attributes of objects, are thus the actual creators
ofd objects as they exist in ἐντελεχεία or completedness; andethis
attribution to formse of a kind of active power, made it difficult to
avoidfregardingf them as substantive entities: whether existing outside
the individual thing or only in it, seeming from that point of view to
be of little consequence.gIndeed, Aristotlehactuallyh makes it one of
his reproaches against Plato’s Ideas, that from their immobility in
themselves, and complete severance from individual bodies, they could
not haveiai moving force, whereby anything can be made to become;
whereas his εἴδη were actual causes.g

Edition: current; Page: [491]
jThe real expulsionkof the objective existence of universals from
philosophy was leftk to be effected by the Nominalist schoolmen, towards
the end of the Middle Ages: since which the only dispute remaining open
is between the pure Nominalism of Hobbes, and the Conceptualism of Locke
and Brown; the one seeing nothing in general names but a collection of
resembling objects and a word; the other superadding a mental
representation, calledl an abstract idea, a general notion, or a
concept. Nevertheless, though Aristotle did not finally accomplish the
work, he will always be honourably recognised as the thinker who began
it;mthe first who saw that knowledge begins in particulars, and rises
from them to the universal, and that our knowledge of universals is but
the knowledge of something which exists in the particulars, some point
which a number of particulars have in common; the first, therefore, who
diverted intellectm from the path which could only lead,nand did for
ages leadn, to making philosophy a jingle of mysticaloabstractions, and
turned it into that better path which lands us at the goal of a truer
philosophy, the most general and comprehensive expression of real
facts.o

In the remainingpbranchesp of logic, those which relate to propositions,
and to theqmodesq of signification of terms, the services of
Aristotlerwere less signal, but not less indispensabler. Before him, the
expression of the operations of the mind in language had scarcely
received the merest commencement ofslogicals analysis: we see by Plato
that technical terms did not yet exist even for the subject and
predicate of a proposition, still less for the differences of
(so-called) quantity and quality in propositions, the equivalence or
non-equivalence of different forms, and the modes of oppositiontamongt
propositions—ausureu proof that these distinctions, elementary as
theyvarev, had not yet excited sufficient attention towhave ledw to
their being generalisedx. Even Plato, as Mr. Grote points out,*x
Edition: current; Page: [492] shows a curious want of perception of some
of them;yandy his predecessors and some of his cotemporaries
werezentangledz in many puzzles,awhich would have been puzzles to no one
to whom these distinctions were familiar, buta from which theybcould
findb no means of extrication but through somecpalpablec absurdity.dIt
is impossible, without some knowledge of the early speculations of
mankind before theiresimpleste logical instruments were duly fashioned,d
to appreciate the debt due to those who first gave to such of those
instruments as are now the most familiar, the precisionfwhich fits themf
for their work. This merit may justly be claimed for Aristotle,
ingrespectg to almost all the terminology and distinctions of formal
logic. Of the “positive theory of propositions which we read in his
treatise De Interpretatione,” Mr. Grote remarks:

It is, so far as we know, the first positive theory thereof that was
ever set out—the first attempt to classify propositions in such a manner
that a legitimate Antiphasis could be assigned to each; the first
declaration that to each affirmative proposition there belonged one
appropriate negative, and to each negative proposition one appropriate
counter-affirmative, and one only—the earliest effort to construct a
theory for this purpose, such as to hold ground against all the puzzling
questions of acute disputants. The clear determination of the Antiphasis
in each case—the distinction of Contradictory antithesis from Contrary
antithesis between propositions—this was an important logical doctrine
never advanced before Aristotle; and the importance of it becomes
manifest when we read the arguments of Plato and Antisthenes, the former
overleaping and ignoring the contradictory opposition, the latter
maintaining that it was a process theoretically indefensible. But in
order that these two modes of antithesis should be clearly contrasted,
each with its proper characteristic, it was requisite that the
distinction of quantity between different propositions should also be
brought to view, and considered in conjunction with the distinction of
quality. Until this was done, the Maxim of Contradiction, denied by
some, could not be shown in its true force or with its proper limits.
Now we find it done, for the first time, in the treatise before us. Here
the Contradictory antithesis (opposition both in quantity and quality)
in which one proposition must be true and the other false, is contrasted
with the Contrary (propositions opposite in quality, but both of them
universal). Aristotle’s terminology is not in all respects fully
developed; in regard, especially, to the quantity of propositions it is
less advanced than in his own later treatises; but from the theory of
the De Interpretatione* all the Edition: current; Page: [493]
distinctions current among later logicians take their rise.*

It is anotherrservice of Aristotle to logicr, that he was the firststo
treats largely and systematically of the ambiguities of terms; and
(though not unfrequently misled by them himself) made a practice,
through all his writings, of distinguishing the various senses in which
the principal terms of philosophy were used, and even discriminating
between meaningstthatt are wholly different and those which are
connected by some tie of analogy with one another. Of this last
distinction he makes frequent use in the generalities of hisuphilosophy.
Foru example, he says that Ensv, or Being,v though predicable of all the
categories (substance, quantity, quality, &c.) is not predicated of them
as awgenus is predicated of its variousw species, in one and the same
sense;xbut yet, not in senses wholly unconnected with one another. Ax
quality, for instance, is not a Being inyexactlyy the same sense as a
Substance is; it is called a Being by a kind of analogy: and some
Beings, therefore, may bez, and are,z more or less Beings than others;a
less fully Beings, Beings in a less complete degree. In connection with
this, let us mention that, as Mr. Grote points out, Aristotlebin some
degreeb Edition: current; Page: [494] anticipated the acute remark of
Hobbes, first brought into its due position of importance by James
Mill,[*] respecting the double meaning ofcto bec; “first, per se, as
meaning existence; next, relatively, as performing the function of
copula in predication. . . . We may truly say Homer is a poet” (copula),
“but we cannot truly say Homer is” (existence). “He tells us, in reply
either to Plato or to some other contemporaries, that though we may
truly say Non-Ens est opinabile, we cannot truly say Non-Ens est,
because the real meaning of the first of these propositions is Non-Ens
est opinabile non esse.”* We see in some of Plato’s dialogues what an
amount of verbal fallacy, and even of genuine perplexity, arose
fromdinattention tod this double meaning.

In the book on the Categories, Entia or Beings, in theelargee extension
which Aristotlefallowsf to the term (angextensiong including whatever
can be thought or spoken abouthaffirmatively, and excluding, if
anything, only negativesh), are distinguished, and arranged under heads;
but only in respect of their capacity of entering into a
proposition.iOnei kind of Ens, the individual object, or Substantia
Prima, is unfit to be predicated of anything except itself, and can
enter into a proposition only as a subject. Genera and Species, or
Second Substances, may be predicates as well as subjects; and they, as
well as all the other Categories, communicate some special kind of
information respecting the subject of which they are predicated.
Substance is the answer to the question, Whatjis it. Quantity to How
great is it. Quality to Of what sort is itj. Ad aliquid, or Relation, to
What character has it in reference to something else. And so with the
other Categories—Where, When, Posture, Dress or Equipment, Action, andk
Being acted upon. There has been an endless amount of writing for,
against, and in explanation of, the validity of this classification. Mr.
Grote, while himself criticizing it from the point of view of the
Relativity oflalll human knowledge, defends it, not without success,
against some of the minor criticisms which have been mademby (among
others)m the present writer.[†] The best which can be said in favour of
it will be found in the acute work of Dr. Franz Brentano, on the
different meanings of ens according to Edition: current; Page: [495]
Aristotle;* aobook often citedo and highly appreciated by Mr. Grote. Dr.
Brentano attempts topdetectp the logical processq, never stated by
Aristotle himself, whereby heq was led to constitute precisely those ten
Categories; and though (as Mr. Grote thinks) he may not haverprovedr
that Aristotlesreally dids reach them by that path, he has undoubtedly
shown that they might have been so reached, and that the
classificationtadmits of a valid defencet from the Aristotelian point of
view. Dr. Brentano has also, we think, completely proved (what has
sometimes been denied) that although, in the scheme of the Categories,
the idea of predication was predominant, Aristotle did also regard them
as the Summa Genera in a classification of Things. To have made the
first attempt at a classification of Things in general in their logical
aspect, external realities and mental abstractionsutakenu together, was
sovconsiderablev a step, that one may more justly wonder that its
defects are not greater, than at their being so great as they are. The
detailedwdiscussion of the severalw Categories brings out various
properties and distinctions which are permanentlyxvalidx, and have
passed into modern thought.

Thus far of Aristotle as a logician: in which characteryhis
performances, considered under the double aspect of originality and
substantial value, have justly earned for himy the highest honour which
it has been in the power of any one to deserve in that science. As a
psychologist and metaphysician he stands on a much lower levelz, and his
labours in those fields have seldom more than an historical interestz.
Except an incidental remark here and there,ahis claims to have madea any
real contribution to positive knowledge on those subjectsbrest onb the
share he had in laying the foundation of the doctrine of Association.
The amount of that share is much disputed. Sir William Hamilton, in one
of the elaborate dissertations appended to his edition of Reid, claims
for Aristotle to have been “at once the founder and finisher of the
theory of association:”[*] meaning, of Edition: current; Page: [496]
course, the laws of association itself,c not the modern applications of
it to the explanation of the moredcomplexd mental phenomenae, most of
which applications Hamilton did not admite. Hefacknowledgesf that in
order to establishgthis high claim on behalf of Aristotle, itg is
necessary to correcthmisconceptions “whichh, bequeathed by the first,
have been inherited by the last of Aristotle’s interpreters.”*iIf,
therefore, the philosopher knew all that Hamilton believed him to have
known, he did not succeed in transmitting the knowledge to his most
distinguished pupils. But this, which to most people would seem a
defect, enhances, in Hamilton’s eyes, the glory of the master.i
“Aristotle,” he says, “has been here so long misapprehended only because
he was so far ahead of his expositors. Nor is there a higher testimony
to his genius than that it required a progress in philosophy of two
thousand years before philosophers were prepared to apprehend his
meaning, when the discovery of that meaning was abandoned to their own
intelligence.”†jLooking solely at his own pages, Hamilton seems to makej
out a strong case.kUnfortunately for him,k Mr. Grote has shown, in a
paperlnow first published (in the appendix), that Hamilton’s capacityl
of putting a meaning into passages of Aristotlemwhich Aristotle never
thought of, exceeded anything for which our previous knowledge of
Hamilton had prepared us. Mr. Grote himself, however,m says, in more
measured language, thatnAristotle, in his account of Memory and
Reminiscence,n “displays an acute and penetrating intelligence of the
great principles of the Association of Ideas,”omore, however, ino
reference to reminiscencepthan to memory; “and the exaggerated
prominence that he has given to the distinction between the two
(determined apparently by a wish to keep the procedure of man apart from
that of animals) tends to perplex his description of the associative
process.”p‡ Had we possessed from Mr. Grote that Edition: current; Page:
[497] qminuteq examination of the treatise on Memory and Reminiscence
which would doubtless have formed part of his work on Aristotle, instead
of the brief notice of it in the essay contributed torMr.r Bain, we
should have been better able to judge how far, if at all, in this case
(as, according to Mr. Lewes, in many branches of physics) modern
knowledge has been read into Aristotle’s words.

Thesparts of Aristotle’s writings known as the Metaphysica did not
receive that name from the philosopher himself; it was invented by his
Greek editors, and signified merely the position which they assigned to
those writings in their arrangement of his works. Aristotle’s own name
for the subject matter of them was ἡ πρώτη ϕιλοσοϕία,[*]t a phrase
adopted from him by Bacon and Hobbes as a name for the highest
generalities of philosophy. It was in this sense that Aristotle used it,
and what he includeduunderu it consisted of all thatvbelongedv to Being
as such—w Ens quatenus Ens; together with—

the axioms and highest generalities of syllogistic proof or
demonstration. He announces, [says Mr. Grote,] as the first principle of
these axioms—as the highest and foremost of all principles—the Maxim of
Contradiction: The same predicate cannot both belong and not belong to
the same subject, at the same time, and in the same sense; or, You
cannot both truly affirm and truly deny the same predicate respecting
the same subject; or, The same proposition cannot be at once true and
false. This Axiom is by nature the beginning or source of all the other
Axioms. It stands first in the order of knowledge, and it neither rests
upon nor involves any hypothesis.*

xThis principium contradictionis,yory Law of Contradiction, has ever
since been recognised as the ultimate principle ofzall syllogistic,
which is as much as to say of all general,z reasoning; the validity of
whichaconsists ina the fact that to deny the conclusion,bacceptingb the
premises, involves a contradiction; andcits real, and only real,
functionc is to keep our particular judgments consistent, anddthe
reverse of those judgmentsd Edition: current; Page: [498] inconsistent,
with the general propositions to which we have previously given our
assent. The distinct laying down of this axiome(“and its supplement or
correlative, the maxim of the Excluded Middle”)e[*] was the necessary
completion of the theory of the syllogism.fObvious as these maxims
appear, the clear perception that the evidence of general reasoning
depends on them was a capital step in philosophy, and shows the
determination of Aristotle to follow subjects up to their first
principles.f

The question arises, what is the ground ofgtheseg axioms themselves; and
Aristotle does not blink this question. There were thinkers in and
before his time,hparticularlyh Herakleitus and his followers, who denied
the axiom of contradiction. Aristotle

goes at length into the case against them, as well as against others,
who agreed with him in affirming the maxim, but who undertook also to
demonstrate it. Any such demonstration Aristotle declares to be
impossible. The maxim is assumed in all demonstrations; unless you grant
it, no demonstration is valid; but it cannot be itself demonstrated. He
had already laid down in the Analytica that the premises for
demonstration could not be carried back indefinitely, and that the
attempt so to carry them back was unphilosophical. There must be some
primary undemonstrable truths; and the Maxim of Contradiction he ranks
among the first. . . .In attempting any formal demonstration of the
maxim, you cannot avoid assuming the maxim itself, and thus falling into
Petitio Principii. [Nevertheless,] Aristotle contends that you can
demonstrate it in the way of refutation, relatively to a given opponent,
provided such opponent will not content himself with simply denying it,
but will, besides, advance some affirmative thesis of his own as a truth
in which he believes; or, provided he will even grant the fixed meaning
of words.*

iMr. Grote gives a fulljexposition of this opinionj of Aristotle, but
himself dissents from it, observing that thekworst dilemma to which the
supposed opponent could be reduced is thatk of falling into another
contradictionl—a difficultyl which, by maintaining that a
self-contradictionmis not necessarilym false, henhasn declared himself
willing to face. In Mr. Edition: current; Page: [499] Grote’s opinion,
the proof of the Axiom of Contradiction, like that of all other
axioms,oiso inductive. “All that can really be done in the way of
defence is, to prove the Maxim in its general enunciation by an appeal
to particular cases. If your opponent is willing to grant these
particular cases, you establish the general Maxim against him by way of
induction; if he will not grant them, you cannot prove the general Maxim
at all.”* This is indeed hunting the doctrine of à priori knowledge from
its last refuge: and we should be heartily glad if we were able to agree
with Mr. Grotep: so important do we deem it both to philosophy and to
practice to leave nothing standing which countenances the notion that
there is a kind of knowledge independent of experiencep. But it seems to
us that though the meaning ofqthe two maxims,q of Contradiction and
Excluded Middle, like that of all other propositions expressed in
general terms, is only understood by means of particular cases,rthose
axiomsr stand, in one respect, on a different ground from axioms in
general.sThe proposition that the affirmation and denial of the same
fact cannot both be true, is at once assented to for this reason, thats
the judging onetof them to be true and judgingt the other to be false
are not two different actsuof the mind, but the same actu. We assent
with like readiness to the statement that they cannot both be false,
because the judging eitherv to be false is the very same mental act with
judging the other to be true. This identity of the mental operation
constitutes thewvery meaning of thew words in which the axioms
arexexpressed;x it is impossible to understand the words “true” and
“false,”y the words “is” and “is not,”zin any other sensez. For this
reason it seems to us that the axioms in question do not need the
support of aagathered experience;a they have their root in a mental fact
which makes it impossible Edition: current; Page: [500] to contravene
them*—a fact implied inkevery form of words which can be used to express
them.klUndoubtedly, however, the impossibility must be felt in
particular instances before it can be assented to in general terms; and
in this sense it must be granted to Mr. Grote that the proof of the
generalisation lies in the particular instances.l†

Edition: current; Page: [501]
We have now reached the limits of the portion of Aristotle’s ontology
and psychology which is fully explained andadiscusseda by Mr. Grote. To
go on to the remainder with no more of that invaluable assistance thanb
the abstract of the Metaphysicac in the appendix, and the analysis of
the De Edition: current; Page: [502] Animâ[*] written for Professor
Bain’s treatise,[†] would be an undertakingdwhich could only be
practicabled after a study of the originalelittle short of that which
had been given by Mr. Grotee. The difficulty of finding a meaning,
intelligible to modern habits of thought, in trains of speculation
sofalien tof our methods, expressed in phraseologygfor which we have no
equivalents, and which seems to us hopelessly entangled andg
irremediably confusing, is extreme; and the result is seldom, unless in
an historical point of view (nor always even in that), of a value
commensurate with the difficulty. The Metaphysica, orh such part of it
as has come down to us (for its fragmentary appearance has struck the
commentators, andiit has been conjectured to have neveri been
completed), turnsjprincipallyj upon the two antitheseskwe have already
referred tok, that of Matter and Form, and that of Potential and Actual.
Everything is composed of Matter and Form, exceptlan hypotheticall First
Matter which has no Form, and a Form which has no Matter, and is the
Divine Intelligence. But those composite objectsmwhich have both Matter
and Form,m are all of them Matter in relation to any different or
additionalnFormsn which they are capable of taking on. Everythingoiso
potentially whatever it is capable of becoming, andpby virtue of the
appropriate Formp it becomes what it does become.qrBesides Matter and
Form, Aristotle recognises another element, Privation.rsSome changest
are produced, not by a Form, but by the Privation of a Form; thus,
heudoes not recognise a Form of Health and a Form of Sickness, but
regardsu sickness as the privation of health;v a sick man, from being
Edition: current; Page: [503] potentially well, becomes actually so
bywreceivingw the Form of Health; but a healthy man becomes sick,
notxthroughx a Form of Sickness, but throughythey Privation of the Form
of Health.s These notions, and theznumerousz minutiæ and subtleties into
which they are followed out, even were they liable to no other
objection, would tell us nothing of the laws of phenomena; theyagive no
power of prediction, and explain nothing; they are buta a particular
mode of restating thebfactsb to be explained. To say that it is the
union of the form of health withcthe matter of the bodyc which makes the
man healthy, isdbutd to say, in technical language, that he is made
healthy by health. Ifethe Form of Health is anything different from the
fact of health, it ise an imaginary entity conjured up out of an
abstraction, and supposed to be immanent in all thingsfthat possessf the
property it is the form of; as, in a still earlier stage of speculation,
gods were thought to be immanent in rivers, and nymphs in trees.gThere
is a state of the human mind in which these metaphysical fictions seem
to convey explanation; and Aristotle, with all his far-sighted
perception that the source of knowledge is observation of particulars,
had not got beyond that state.g

hWhat is commonly called the Psychologyh of Aristotle is a theory of the
various souls, or living principles, which he recognises as existing in
nature, and regards as the Forms or Active Principles of life in its
different degrees; though he hardly regards them as objectively distinct
from one another, but rather as modifications ofia singlei Principle,
successively superinduced by the addition ofjmorej attributes.kHis
classification of the supposed agents fairly coincides with the modern
classification of the phenomena.k The first is the Nutritive Soul,
common to animal and vegetable life. The second is the Sensitivel, which
is also the Locomotivel Soul, common to all animals. The third and
highest is the Noëtic, or Intellectual Soul, belonging to man alone.
This last, again, he finds it necessary to subdivide into the passive,
or merely receptive intelligence, and the active intelligence, or νου̑ς
ποιητικός; the latter of which is the moving force, Edition: current;
Page: [504] mthroughm which what is merely potential in the passive
intelligence becomes actual.[*] No part of the speculations of Aristotle
is more obscure than the theory ofnthen νου̑ς ποιητικός, which he
regarded as a part of the universal νου̑ς of the universe, independent of
the bodily frame, andotherefore capableo of surviving it, though whether
or not with a personal immortalitypremainsp matter of dispute. The
subject isqbutq slightly touched on in the essay by Mr. Grote whichris
printed asr the last chapter of his treatise. As full and elaborate
treatment of it, grounded on a comprehensive view of Aristotle’s
metaphysical doctrines,thas been givent by a writer already mentioned,
Dr. Franz Brentano,uin a worku On the Psychology of Aristotle,
especially with reference to the νου̑ς ποιητικός,* which,whaving been
published as lately as 1867w, does not seem to have been known to Mr.
Grote when he wrote his essayx; and which, without venturing to decide
whether the author has established all his points, the present writer
cannot help noting as one of the most thoroughly executed pieces of
philosophical research and exegesisx which it has been his fortune to
meet with.

The Ethics, Politics,[†] and Rhetoric of Aristotle are notytouched upony
by Mr. Grote, and the presentzis not a convenientz occasion forasaying
much about them; still less about the Poetics.a[‡] We maybsay, however,
of the Rhetoric, thatb besides its special worth incregardc to its
particular Edition: current; Page: [505] subject, which is even now
considerable,ditd is one of theericheste repositories of incidental
remarks on human nature andfhuman affairs thatf the ancients have
bequeathed togus. Ing this consists also, in our judgment, the principal
value of the Ethics and Politics, which, as treatises onhthose specialh
subjects, have for their most markedicharacteristics thati dread of
extremes andjlove of the via media which were deeply rooted in
Aristotle’s mind. The Politics, in lieuj of the adventurous
anticipations of geniuskwhich we find in the Republic of Plato, presents
us withk the mode of thinking of a Liberal Conservative, or rather, of a
moderate aristocratical politician, at Athens. In the main,litl is a
philosophic consecration of existing facts (witness its strange defence
of slavery),[*] choosing by preference among those factsmsuch asm tend
towards stability, rather than towards improvement.nIt should be
remembered that, unless so far as Plato may be considered an exception,
none of the ancient politicians or philosophers believed in progress;
their highest hopes were limited to guarding society against its natural
tendency to degeneration.n

There remainsoto be noticedo one work of Aristotle, which is copiously
analyzed andpcommented onp by Mr. Grote, and which is of great
importance toqaq correct understanding of the Greek mind: the treatise
whichr, under the name of Topica, is included in the Organon, and of
which the Sophistici Elenchi is properly the concluding bookr. Bothsthe
conception ands the detail of this worktare of a nature tot puzzle, and,
when not properly understood,utou scandalize, the modern mind. It is a
treatise on Dialectic Reasoning, as distinguished from Demonstrative,
which last had been elaborately treated in thevAnalytics. Dialecticv, as
there understood, Edition: current; Page: [506] isw the art of arguing
for victory, not for truth,xand instruction in that art is the declaredx
object of the treatise. In order justly to appreciate suchya designy,
and to perceive how it could coexist, as in Aristotle’s case the whole
collection of his writings witnesses that it did, with an indefatigable
ardour in the pursuit of truth, it is necessary to remember how large a
place in Grecian life was occupied by contests of skill between
individuals, in matters both physical and intellectual. When wezthink
ofz the vast honour understood toaaccruea, not onlybto the actual victor
but to the city he belonged tob, by his gaining a prize in the Olympic
festivalcamong which prizes one for poetry was included)c, and
thednumerousd minorecompetitionse of a similar kind in the various Greek
states,fby which the minds of aspiring persons were kept perpetually on
the stretch to acquire celebrity by successes of this nature; it cannot
be wondered atf that after Dialectics, or regulated discussion by
question and answer, had been introduced by Zeno of Elea, and brought to
perfection by Socrates and Plato, this also should have become
extensively popular as a game of skill. In this game, a thesis, usually
on somegimportant and highly interesting subjectg, was propounded for
discussion,hthe propounder undertakingh to defend it against
alliobjections. The assailants were required to proceed by puttingi
questions to him, which must be such as admitted ofjan explicitj answer
by yes or no, nor was any other kind of answer permissible.kIf the
assailants were able to reduce the respondent to admissions inconsistent
with each other or with the thesis, they were victorious; if they failed
to do this, the victory was with the respondent.k In this intellectual
exercise no wrong was done to truth,lthe known object being,l not to
disprove the thesis, but to test the disputant’s ability to defend it
against objections. How completely Edition: current; Page: [507] msuchm
was the sole object is shown in this, that the assailant of the thesis
was not allowed to propound positive arguments against it; he could only
put questions to the respondent, and must derive his refutation from the
respondent’s own answers. There is nothing immoral in arguing for
victory when that is thenobject professedn, and the only wrongothat
couldo be committed in the casepwasp a violation of the rules of the
game. These rules were of course framed with a view to render such
contests possible, to make them intelligible and interesting to an
audience, and to secure a fair field and fair play to bothqsides. This
explainsq why the premises introduced by the arguers were required to be
ἔνδοξα, (in the language of the casuists, borrowed no doubt from
Aristotle, probable opinions), that is, they must be opinions
eitherrheld generallyr by mankind, or maintained by some respected
authority. However true they might be, if they were recondite, and
remote from common apprehension, the respondent could not reasonably be
expected to be prepared for them; while, if they had good authority on
their side, it was not even necessary that the person using them should
believe them to be true, truth not being the object, but to reduce the
respondent to an inconsistency, and itsbeings always open to himtto
admit them or nott. The same thing explains why it wasu lawful, even in
the opinion of Aristotle, to entrap the respondent into an admission,
which on calm reflection he would not have made; for this equally
answered the purpose of testing his skill and knowledge. On the other
hand, the licenses allowed by the game might be pushed too far, and the
allowable kinds and degrees of artifice might be exceeded in such a
manner as to defeat the legitimatevpurpose of the trial of skill. Thisv,
Aristotle says, waswoften done by dishonest persons, or personsw of a
litigious disposition; and the concluding book,xDe Sophisticis
Elenchisx, is composed of warnings againstytheiry malpractices.

zThe purpose of Aristotle, in giving instructions for success in these
contests, went much farther than merely to qualify people for being
victorious over an adversary. The study and practice werez, he said, of
great Edition: current; Page: [508] utility in reference to the pursuit
of truth. “First” (awe nowa quote from Mr. Grote) “the debate is a
valuable and stimulating mental exercise.”bThis was the simplest and
most obvious of its recommendations.b “Secondly, it is useful for our
intercourse with the multitude: for the procedure directs us to note and
remember the opinions of the multitude, and such knowledge will
facilitate our intercourse with them; we shall converse with them out of
their own opinions, which we may thus be able beneficially to modify.”
This iscinteresting,c as indicating Aristotle’s opiniond(differing from
that of many of the ancient philosophers)d that the philosopher ought
not to keepealoofe from the multitude, andfwithdraw himself fromf the
duty of advising them for their good by arguments drawngfromg their own
opinions. “Thirdly, dialectic debate has an useful though indirect
bearing even upon the processes of science and philosophy, and upon the
truths thereby acquired. For it accustoms us to study the difficulties
on both sides of every question, and thus assists us in detecting and
discriminating truth and falsehood.”* Of this benefithfromh dialectic
exercise, Aristotle’s own practice affords airemarkable verificationi:
for he veryjfrequentlyj commences his investigation of a difficult
question byka detailedk enumeration and statement of the ἀπορίαι, the
difficulties or puzzles, which affect it; and there is no way in which
his method of studying a subject sets a more beneficial example. In this
respectlhe was greatlyl in advance not only of his own time, butm of
ours. His general advice for exercise and practice in Dialecticnis
admirably adapted ton the training of one’s own mindoforo the pursuit of
truth. “You ought to test every thesis by first assuming it to be true,
then assuming it to be false, and following out the consequences on both
sides.”pThis was already the practice of the Eleatic dialecticians, as
we see in the Parmenidesq.p

Edition: current; Page: [509]
When you have hunted out each train of arguments, look out at once for
the counter-arguments available against it. This will strengthen your
power both as questioner and respondent. It is, indeed, an exercise so
valuable, that you will do well to go through it by yourself, if you
have no companion. Put the different trains of argument bearing on the
same thesis into comparison with one another. A wide command of
arguments, affirmative as well as negative, will serve you well both for
attack andr defence. The same accomplishment will be of use, moreover,
for acquisitions even in science and philosophy. It is a great step to
see and grasp in conjunction the trains of reasoning on both sides of
the question; the task that remains—right determination which of the two
is the better—becomes much easier.*

We are far from asserting that the dialectic contests of the Greeks, or
the public disputations of the Middle Ages whichssucceeded tos them, had
never any but a beneficialteffectt; that they had not their snares and
their temptations, and that the good they effected might not be still
better attained by other means. But the fact remains that no such means
have been provided, and that the oldutraining hasu disappeared, even
from the Universities, without having beenvreplacedv by any other. There
is no reason why a practice so useful for the pursuit of truth should
not be employed when thewattainmentw of truth is thexsolex object. We
have known this most effectually done by a set of young students of
philosophy, assembling on certain days to read regularly through some
standard book on psychology,y logic, or political economy; suspending
the reading whenever any one had a difficulty to propound or an idea to
start, and carrying on the discussion from day to day, if necessary for
weeks, until the point raised had been searched to its inmost depths,
and no difficulty or obscurity capable of removal by discussion
remained. The intellectual training given by these debates, and
especially the habit they gave of leaving no dark corners unexplored—of
searching out all the ἀπορίαι, and never passing overzanyz unsolved
difficulty—has been felt, by those who took part, to have been
invaluable to them as a mental discipline. There would be nothing
impracticable in making exercises of this kind a standing element of the
course of instruction in the higher branches of knowledge; if Edition:
current; Page: [510] the teachers had anyaperceptiona of the want which
such discussions would supply, or thought it any part of their business
to form thinkers, instead of “principling” their pupils (as Locke
expresses it) with ready-made knowledge.[*] But the saying of James
Mill, in his essay on Education, is as true now as when it was
written—that even the theory of education is far behind the progress of
knowledge, and the practice lamentably behind even the theory.[†]

bWe now take our leave of Aristotle, referring the reader for fuller
knowledge to Mr. Grote’s book; which, as a guide to all the parts of
Aristotle’s speculations that are included in it, fulfils the
expectations excited by his work on Plato, and leaves nothing to regret
but that the remainder of the Aristotelian writings have not had the
benefit of the same clear exposition and philosophical criticism, and
that a general estimate of Aristotle and of what he did, by so competent
a judge, has not been bestowed on us. Besides the matter already spoken
of, the work contains a life of Aristotle, and a discussion of the canon
of his writings; in both of which, the use made of scanty materials is
worthy the author of the History of Greece. It is a curious and almost
unique accident, that although many of the writings of Aristotle have
been lost, we are actually in possession of some, and those among the
most important, which were not accessible to his followers for many
generations after the death of his immediate successor, Theophrastus.
The collection of manuscripts made by Aristotle and enlarged by
Theophrastus, which contained the most precious of the Aristotelian
treatises, remained near a century and a half in a hiding place under
ground, at Skepsis in Asia Minor, to prevent their being seized by the
kings of Pergamus to enrich the royal library; and they emerged from
thence after the extinction of the Attalid dynasty, so injured by damp
and worms that many passages had to be restored conjecturally: first by
anincompetent editor, Apellikon; afterwards more intelligently, but
necessarily with increase of difficulty, by Andronicus of Rhodes,
somewhat later than the time of Cicero, in whose early youth the books
were brought to Rome from Athens by Sylla. So narrowly did posterity
escape the loss of one of the chief treasures of Grecian antiquity; many
of the treatises having only come down to us through these damaged
manuscripts: the condition of which is probably responsible for much of
the obscurity which has given so much trouble to commentators and to
students: for Aristotle’s literary style, though often awkward (being
both prolix and elliptical) is by no means, in his best preserved works,
deficient in clearness.

Edition: current; Page: [511]
