The British Library Newspaper Library

Edition: current; Page: [cxx]
[lf0223-22_figure_002.jpg]
The Spirit of the Age, V [Part 1]

Examiner, 15 May, 1831, p. 307

Somerville College Library

Edition: current; Page: [1]


NEWSPAPER WRITINGS BY JOHN STUART MILL
 December 1822 to July 1831

Edition: current; Page: [2] Edition: current; Page: [3]


December 1822 to December 1824


1.: EXCHANGEABLE VALUE [1]
 TRAVELLER, 6 DEC., 1822, P. 3

This and the next letter, Mill’s first published writings, were
occasioned by “Political Economy Club,” Traveller, 2 Dec., p. 3, by
Robert Torrens (1780-1864), co-proprietor of the newspaper and a
founding member of the Political Economy Club; the subject of Torrens’s
article was the meeting of that Club to be held later that day. Mill’s
reply brought forth a retort from Torrens in “Exchangeable Value,”
Traveller, 7 Dec., p. 3, and the series terminated with a note by
Torrens appended to Mill’s second letter. The exchange centred on the
theory of value advanced in Elements of Political Economy (London:
Baldwin, et al., 1821) by James Mill (1773-1836), J.S. Mill’s father; in
his Autobiography Mill says his reply to Torrens was at his father’s
“instigation” (CW, Vol. I, p. 89). Headed as title, with the subhead “To
the Editor of the Traveller,” the items are described in Mill’s
bibliography as “Two letters in the Traveller of [6th Dec.] and [13th
Dec.] 1822 containing a controversy with Col. Torrens on the question
whether value depends on quantity of labour. Signed S.”

(MacMinn, p. 1.)

sir,—

In your notice of the late Meeting of the Political Economy Club, you
have inserted a disquisition, which professes to be a refutation of Mr.
Mill’s theory of value. I take the liberty of submitting to you several
remarks which occurred to me on reading your article.

In the first place, if I rightly understand Mr. Mill’s chapter on
Exchangeable Value,1 he cannot be said with propriety to have any theory
of value—at least, in that sense in which the word theory is applied to
Mr. Ricardo’s doctrines on this subject. Mr. R. renders the word value,
as synonymous with productive cost2—thus introducing a new, and as it
appears to me, a needless ambiguity of language. Mr. Mill, on the other
hand, never uses the word value in any other than its vulgar
acceptation. I am not aware that there is any passage in the Elements of
Political Economy, in which the words power of purchasing may not be
substituted for the word value, without in any degree affecting the
truth of Mr. Mill’s positions.

But though the word value is never employed by Mr. Mill, in any other
sense Edition: current; Page: [4] than purchasing power, it is
nevertheless true that he endeavours to ascertain what are the
circumstances which regulate the purchasing power of commodities.3 He
agrees with the distinguished political economist whom we have cited, in
considering the regulating circumstance to be cost of production. This
cost he considers as resolvable into quantity of labour, and it is to
this part of his doctrine that your strictures refer. As your arguments
on this subject do not appear to me to be conclusive, I beg leave to
offer my objections to their validity.

You say, “Let the rate of profit be 20 per cent.; let a manufacturer in
silver and a manufacturer in iron each advance a capital of a thousand
pounds, and let the advance of the former consist of ninety days’
hoarded labour, in the form of material, and ten days’ hoarded labour in
the form of subsistence, while the advance of the latter consists of ten
days’ hoarded labour in the form of material, and ninety in the form of
subsistence.” [P. 3.]

You observe that the manufacturer in silver, with ten days’ labour of
subsistence, must employ twelve days of immediate labour, in order to
realize a profit of 20 per cent.; and that the manufacturer in iron,
with his 90 days’ labour of subsistence, will employ 108 days of
immediate labour: that therefore the silver goods, when completed, will
be the produce of twelve days of immediate labour, and 90 of hoarded
labour, in the form of material; while the iron goods will be the
produce of 108 days of immediate labour, and 120 of hoarded labour, also
in the form of material; forming the two different sums total of 102 and
118 days’ labour.

This being the case, you assert that the silver and the iron goods will
exchange for one another. To this I cannot assent. You appear to have
forgotten, that if profits are taken into the account at all, we must
suppose the two manufacturers to make a profit, not merely on that
portion of their capital which they expend in maintaining labour, but
also on that portion which they expend in furnishing the raw material.
By supposition, the capital of each producer consisted of one hundred
days’ labour. You assert that when the production is completed, the
silver manufacturer has only the produce of 102 days’ labour, while the
iron manufacturer has the produce of 118 days’ labour, in remuneration
for their capital. The former then has only a profit of 2 per cent. on
his whole capital, the latter has a profit of 18 per cent. on the whole.
It is evident that, under these circumstances, the two commodities will
not exchange for one another: their values will be in the proportion of
102 to 118—that is, of the quantities of labour by which they were
produced. This, at least, will be the case, if profits are to be
considered as forming one ingredient in cost of production, the position
on which your whole argument is founded.

If profits are equal in the two cases, as the principle of competition
will render them, it is unnecessary to take them into the calculation of
exchangeable value, Edition: current; Page: [5] which is, by the force
of the term, not something absolute, but something relative. If the
whole produce of the one capital exchanges for the whole produce of the
other, those parts of them which remain when profits are deducted, will
also exchange for one another. But if we exclude profits, your objection
falls to the ground. Mr. Mill’s argument must, therefore, be considered
as resting on the same foundation as before.

You have also started an objection against another of Mr. Mill’s
arguments. The value of commodities (says Mr. M.) cannot depend upon
capital, since capital is commodities, and if the value of commodities
depends on the value of capital, it depends on the value of
commodities—that is, on itself.4 You observe, that this argument cuts
both ways. If the value of commodities depends upon labour, as the value
of labour can only be estimated in commodities, this (say you) is to
assert that the value of labour depends on the value of labour. This
would be true if Mr. M. had asserted that the value of commodities
depends on the value of labour. But he says, that it depends, not on the
value but on the quantity of labour:5 there is here no inconsistency.
The value of commodities depends upon the quantity of labour employed in
producing them. The value of labour, which is not itself produced by
labour, cannot be subject to the same laws. Mr. M. in his Chapter on
Wages, has expounded the laws which regulate the value of labour.6

S.


2.: EXCHANGEABLE VALUE [2]
 TRAVELLER, 13 DEC., 1822, P. 2

For the context, heading, and bibliographical information, see No. 1.

sir,—

In your Paper of Saturday you inserted an article professing to be a
refutation of that which you did me the honour of inserting on Friday.
Permit me, however, to say, that if I was before convinced of the truth
of Mr. Mill’s conclusions, my conviction is strengthened by the weakness
of the arguments which are brought against them by the ablest of their
opponents.

You accuse me of having misunderstood your arguments. I am at a loss to
conceive what interpretation can be put upon them, different from that
which I have given. In the argument of your first article I can see only
two things: first, an elaborate attempt to prove what no one ever
thought of disputing—namely, that labour produces more than is necessary
for the maintenance of the labourers: Edition: current; Page: [6] and
secondly, an inference drawn from this—namely, that labour does not
regulate exchangeable value. Your reasoning amounts to this—labour is
productive, therefore labour does not regulate value. I hope you will
excuse me if I confess that I do not see the connection between these
two propositions. One man by one day’s labour may possibly produce food
which will maintain him for ten days; but it does not follow from this,
that one day’s labour of food will not exchange for one day’s labour of
any other commodity.

In your last article, you put a different case. You suppose A to have
wine, the produce of 100 days’ labour, and B to have food, the produce
of equal labour. A keeps his wine in his cellar to improve by age; B
employs his capital in maintaining 120 days of labour in the production
of a commodity. These commodities, you say, will exchange for one
another; and you conceive that here labour does not regulate value. It
seems to me, however, that this is not an exception to Mr. Mill’s
doctrine. You virtually admit that the value of B’s commodity is
regulated by the quantity of labour expended in its production. But if
the wine produced by equal capital, and deposited in the cellar of the
merchant, did not command the same price, no wine would ever be kept.
The value, therefore, of A’s wine is regulated by that of B’s commodity.
But the value of B’s commodity depends on quantity of labour. Is it not,
therefore, evident that the value of A’s wine also depends on quantity
of labour?

S.


3.: RELIGIOUS PERSECUTION
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 1 JAN., 1823, P. 1

This letter was occasioned by a series of prosecutions for blasphemous
libel that received considerable attention in the press (see, e.g., in
the last part of 1822, Examiner, 27 Oct., pp. 685-6, 3 Nov., pp. 709-10,
17 Nov., pp. 721-4, 726, 734, 24 Nov., pp. 748-9, 764-5, 15 Dec., pp.
788ff.). Headed as title, with the subhead “To the Editor of the Morning
Chronicle,” the letter was the first of Mill’s many contributions to the
Morning Chronicle. The item is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A
letter in the Morning Chronicle of 1st January 1823 on Free Discussion,
signed, An Enemy to Religious Persecution”

(MacMinn, p. 1).

sir,—

I beg leave to submit to you some observations, which may, perhaps,
appear too obvious to be deserving of insertion. The importance,
however, of the subject, and the state of vagueness in which every thing
connected with it has been hitherto suffered to remain, must plead my
apology for intruding upon your notice.

The late persecutions for matters of opinion have frequently been
defended, on Edition: current; Page: [7] the ground that “Christianity
is part and parcel of the law of England.”1 This sentence, put together
by a Judge, passed from Judge to Judge with solemn and appalling
gravity, will be found, on examination, to be, like the many other
high-sounding maxims with which our law abounds, utterly unmeaning and
absurd. This is so evident, that nothing but the extreme vagueness of
the language in which this doctrine is conveyed could have protected it
from detection and exposure.

A law is a precept, to the non-observance of which, pains and penalties
are attached by the Government. Against this definition, I apprehend, no
objection can be brought. And the law of England, collectively
considered, is a collection of the precepts, thus sanctioned by legal
authority.

Having thus settled the meaning of one of the words employed, let us
pass to the other. Christianity then consists of two parts—a collection
of precepts and a collection of opinions. When we speak of the spirit of
christianity, of its morality, &c., we allude more particularly to the
precepts. When we speak of the doctrines, the dogmas, the truths of
christianity, this is with reference to the opinions which it
inculcates. This division appears to me to be complete. No one can
mention any thing connected with christianity, which is not either
matter of precept, or matter of opinion.

Now when it is asserted by Judges that christianity is part and parcel
of the law, is this meant of the precepts of christianity?—No,
certainly: for if so, it would mean that every moral duty is enforced by
the law of England; of the impossibility of this, it is scarcely
necessary to produce any illustration. Not to notice the frequent
admonitions which we find in the Gospel for preserving purity of heart,2
it will not be denied that sobriety and chastity are among the first of
moral duties. But what would be the consequence of erecting them into a
law? It is enough to say that it would be necessary to place a spy in
every house.

But if not the precepts, perhaps the opinions which christianity
inculcates, may be said with propriety to be “part and parcel of the
law.” And how? The law is a collection of precepts. In what sense can an
opinion be part of a collection of precepts?—Surely this maxim, which
has been made the foundation of proceedings such as we have lately
witnessed, is either palpably false, or wholly without a meaning.
Unfortunately the protection, as it is sacrilegiously termed, of the
christian doctrines, by the persecution of those who hold contrary
opinions, is part and parcel of the law. But this, the only intelligible
sense in which the maxim can be taken, ought not thus to be made a
foundation for itself.—The Judge argues as follows:—I punish infidelity,
because christianity Edition: current; Page: [8] is part and parcel of
the law. This is as much as to say, I punish infidelity, because such
punishment is part of the law.—This may be a very good defence for the
particular Judge who pronounces the sentence, but is it not absurd to
give it as a justification of the persecuting law?

An Enemy to Religious Persecution


4.: THE WORD “NATURE”
 REPUBLICAN, 3 JAN., 1823, PP. 25-6

This letter, which reflects Mill’s contemporaneous study of law with
John Austin, is addressed to Richard Carlile (1790-1843), the
free-thinker, who was editing the Republican from Dorchester Gaol, where
he had been imprisoned for publishing the works of Thomas Paine and
other writings held to be seditious. Mill seems to have been mistaken in
attributing to Carlile the view expressed in his opening paragraph;
Carlile appended to the letter a signed note: “My Atheistical friend is,
I think, wrong in supposing that I wrote such an assertion as that,
there must be a cause to be attributed. I may have said the phenomena of
the material world: or that the constant charges [sic] which we behold
in materials argue the existence of a cause or active power that
pervades them. But I have again and again renounced the notion of that
power being intelligent or designing.” The letter, Mill’s only one to
the Republican, is headed “To Mr. R. Carlile, Dorchester Gaol,” and is
described in Mill’s bibliography as “A letter in the Republican of [3
Jan., 1823,] on the word Nature”

(MacMinn, p. 1).

sir,—

Admiring as I do the firmness with which you maintain, and the
astonishing candour with which you defend your principles, sympathising
in your opinions and feelings both on the subject of politics and on
that of religion; I deeply regret, in common with your correspondent
Gallus,1 that you should ever have given currency to doctrines in direct
opposition to your other opinions. From among many such doctrines, I
select one, which appears to me to be the stumbling block of a great
number of Infidels. This is to be gathered from the use which you
frequently make of the word Nature as denoting some positive, active, if
not intelligent being. In a former No. of The Republican, in allusion to
the application which has been made to you of the word Atheist, you
observe that although you do not reject this appellation, you consider
it as a very absurd one, as you conceive that every man must
acknowledge, under the name either of God, or of nature some cause to
which the material world is to be attributed. Your exact words I do not
remember, but I am certain that this was the import of what you said.

Now as I do not myself acknowledge any such cause, I would if it were
necessary, endeavour to convince you that there is no foundation for any
such belief. But I rejoice to see that this labour is spared me by the
admirable letter of Edition: current; Page: [9] Gallus. I will therefore
confine myself to a brief examination of the import and application of
the word Nature.

All human knowledge consists in facts, or phenomena, observed by the
senses and recorded by means of language. The study of these phenomena
is what is called the study of Nature: the aggregate of the phenomena,
or human knowledge as it stands, is called Nature in the abstract. If
this be true, you must at once see the absurdity of supposing any thing
to be caused by Nature. Nature is that for which the cause is to be
sought; or rather, it is that for which it is needless to seek any
cause, as if it has any, this must remain for ever unknown.

The phenomena which we observe are found to follow one another in a
certain order; the same event is invariably observed to be preceded by
the same event. When a sufficient number of these sequences has been
observed, it becomes possible to express them by a certain number of
general propositions, which have been metaphorically termed Laws of
Nature, but which have in reality no resemblance to laws. A law is a
general command laid down by a superior, most commonly by the governors
of a nation. The analogy is very distant between this and a verbal
expression for a series of phenomena; which is absurdly called a law of
Nature.

When once this phraseology was introduced, the poets and mythologists
soon took hold of it, and made it subservient to their purposes. Nature
was personified: the phrase law of Nature, which originally meant no
more than a law for the regulation of Nature, or of the natural world,
became a law laid down by the goddess Nature to be obeyed by her
creatures. From the poets, this fictitious personage speedily penetrated
into the closets of the philosopher, and hence arose the error of
attributing a creative power to nature. To make any use of this word, in
the explanation of the material phenomena, is only substituting for
rational scepticism, a mystical and poetical kind of Theism. Of course,
the arguments which serve to explode the belief in an ante-material and
intelligent Being, will also suffice to destroy the unmeaning word
Nature.

Yours, with the greatest respect,
 An Atheist


5.: FREE DISCUSSION, LETTER I
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 28 JAN., 1823, P. 3

The series made up of this and the next two letters is referred to in
Mill’s Autobiography after his mention of his first publications, Nos. 1
and 2: “I soon after attempted something considerably more ambitious.
The prosecutions of Richard Carlile and his wife and sister for
publications hostile to Christianity, were then exciting much attention,
and nowhere more than among the people I frequented. Freedom of
discussion, even in politics, much more in religion, was at that time
far from being, even in theory, the conceded point Edition: current;
Page: [10] which it at least seems to be now; and the holders of noxious
opinions had to be always ready to argue and reargue for the liberty of
expressing them. I wrote a series of five letters, under the signature
of Wickliffe [sic], going over the whole length and breadth of the
question of free publication of all opinions on religion, and offered
them to the Morning Chronicle. Three of them were published in January
and February 1823; the other two containing things too outspoken for
that journal, never appeared at all.” (CW, Vol. I, pp. 89-91.) The two
final letters seem not to have survived. All headed as title and
subheaded “To the Editor of the Morning Chronicle,” the letters are
described in Mill’s bibliography as “Three letters, signed Wickliff, on
the same subject [as that of No. 3, i.e., freedom of religious
discussion], inserted in the Morning Chronicle of 28th January [, 8th
February and 12th February,] 1823”

(MacMinn, p. 1).

sir,—

At a time when the question of free discussion on religious subjects is
agitated with unusual perseverance, and is therefore peculiarly
interesting, I think it highly useful to call the public attention to
the nothingness of the arguments which have been brought against
unlimited toleration; arguments which, though they have been refuted
many times already, are daily repeated, and by a very common artifice
represented as never having been answered.

I shall first observe, that as it is generally allowed that free
discussion contributes to the propagation of truth, and as this
assertion is never controverted on the great majority of subjects, it is
incumbent on those who declare against toleration to point out some
reason which prevents the general rule from being applicable to this
particular case; to shew that free discussion, which on almost every
other subject is confessedly advantageous to truth, in this particular
case unfortunately contributes to the progress of error. If they cannot
produce any satisfactory reason, the general rule ought unquestionably
to be observed; and that, even if it were not necessary to employ fine
and imprisonment in support of the exception; much more when so great a
mass of evil is produced by it.

The puerility of the reasons which have hitherto been brought against
religious toleration, is perfectly surprising, and proves most
satisfactorily that the cause in support of which they are brought is a
bad one. The most common of all is the worn-out fallacy, that there is
greater danger of mistake on these subjects than on others.

This assertion, it is to be observed, is wholly destitute of proof. In a
subsequent letter I will endeavour to prove, not only that the danger of
mistake is not greater, but that it is much less in the case of religion
than in any other.1 Admitting, however, for the present, that there is
greater danger of mistake, I shall proceed to shew, that if free
discussion be excluded, the danger is greatly increased.

For if you determine before-hand that opinions shall be promulgated only
on one side of the question, in whom will you rest the power of
determining which side shall be chosen? The answer is, in those who are
most enlightened and best Edition: current; Page: [11] qualified to
judge. But there are no determinable and universal marks by which wisdom
is to be known. To whom will you give the power of determining what men
are the most enlightened?

What is meant, though it is not openly avowed, by the assertion that the
wisest men shall chuse opinions for the people, is that the Government
shall chuse them. But if the Government is allowed to chuse opinions for
the people, the Government is despotic. To say that there is no danger
in permitting the Government to chuse religious opinions for the people,
is to assert what is notoriously untrue: since there is no conceivable
opinion, true or false, which may not, at some time or other, be made a
religious doctrine. There is scarcely a single improvement, either in
physical or in political science, which has not at one time or another
been opposed by religion. The Ptolemaean astronomy was at one time a
part of religion.2 A professor was imprisoned within these last two
years at Rome for maintaining the truth of the Newtonian system, which
is still condemned by the Papal Court.3 The doctrine of passive
obedience and non-resistance was generally a religious doctrine, and is
still that of the prevailing party of the Church of England.4

But if you exclude discussion on any one doctrine of religion, you must,
by parity of reason, exclude it on all. It is in vain to say that
Atheistical opinions shall alone be excluded. What reason is there why
this more than any other subject should be prevented from undergoing a
thorough examination? There is, if not a reason, at least a cause, why
Atheism now undergoes that persecution to which other less obnoxious
doctrines were formerly subjected. But this cause is merely that the
persuasion of its falsehood is more general than in the case of any
other obnoxious opinion. To bring this as a reason for preventing
discussion, is to say that the people are better qualified to judge
before discussion than after it: which is absurd, since before
discussion, if their opinions are true it is only by accident, whereas
after it they hold them with a complete conviction, and perfect
knowledge of the proofs on which they are grounded.

That the evils incurred by permitting any person or persons to chuse
opinions Edition: current; Page: [12] for the people are evils of the
greatest magnitude, is evident from the arguments which I have adduced.
This subject is developed in the most satisfactory manner in Mr. Mill’s
invaluable Essay on the Liberty of the Press, forming an article in
Napier’s Supplement to the Encyclopaedia Britannica.5

The only other argument of any plausibility which the
anti-tolerationists adduce in favour of the present persecutions, is the
incalculable mischievousness of the doctrines persecuted, which they
conceive to outweigh the evil we have proved to arise from allowing the
Government to chuse opinions for the people.

I, therefore, propose to examine whether the mischievous effects of
these doctrines are so great as to justify persecution; secondly,
whether there are not many other doctrines attended with mischiefs
infinitely greater, and which, nevertheless, it would be reckoned, and
with justice, highly improper to persecute; thirdly, to prove that there
is scarcely any kind of mischievous opinion, be it what it may, which
the ignorant are not more likely to adopt, if it be tolerated, than
atheism and deism; and lastly, to refute some of the minor fallacies
which have been brought in defence of persecution.

These four objects I shall endeavour to attain in as many letters, if
they should be thought worthy of insertion in your admirable paper,
which, in addition to the other benefits it is continually rendering to
mankind, has uniformly stood forward in a most manly and most Christian
manner in defence of free discussion.

Wickliff


6.: FREE DISCUSSION, LETTER II
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 8 FEB., 1823, P. 3

This letter, centring on the utility of oaths, draws heavily on “Swear
not at all”: Containing an Exposure of the Inutility and
Mischievousness, as Well as Anti-Christianity, of the Ceremony of an
Oath (London: Hunter, 1817), by Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832); in his
Works, ed. John Bowring, 11 vols. (Edinburgh: Tait, 1843), Vol. V, pp.
187-229. (This work was printed in 1813, and a copy given to the Head of
an Oxford College in that year, almost certainly during the tour on
which Bentham took Mill and his father; see CW, Vol. I, pp. 55-7.) In
the tract Bentham refers to all the issues cited by Mill: jurymen’s
oaths, pp. 204-5, custom-house oaths, p. 195, university oaths, pp.
195-7, 209-12, 213-19, and 224-9 (all dealing with Oxford, Bentham’s
university, except pp. 213-19, on Cambridge), and Quakers’ affirmations,
p. 201. For the context, heading, and entry in Mill’s bibliography, see
No. 5.

Edition: current; Page: [13]
sir,—

In my first letter I endeavoured to give a general conception of the
plan which I intend to pursue in advocating the cause of free
discussion. This plan I will now endeavour to carry into execution.

Persecutors do not usually attempt to justify their intolerance under
pretence of avenging the cause of God. The absurdity of this pretension
would be too obvious, since it would imply that God is unable to avenge
his own cause; and since it is also evident, that Christianity rejects
this method of defence. If there was any reason which could justify
persecution in the eyes of a man of sense, that reason must be its
utility to man; and it is upon this circumstance accordingly, that the
greatest stress has been laid. By permitting the propagation of infidel
doctrines, you destroy, it is said, the principal security for good
judicature, and for the practice of private morality.

How far this assertion is true it shall be our business to inquire; and
first as to judicature—among those requisites without which good
judicature cannot exist, the principal is true and complete evidence. A
great part of the evidence delivered in a Court of Justice consists in
the testimony of witnesses. To secure veracity on the part of witnesses
is therefore one of the most important ends to which the Legislator can
direct his endeavours.

For insuring the veracity of witnesses, among other securities the
ceremony of an oath has been resorted to. That the desired effect is
attained in a very considerable degree is certain—that this beneficial
result is to be attributed to the ceremony of swearing, is by no means a
legitimate conclusion. There are several motives which tend to produce
veracity on the part of witnesses. Even those who attribute the effect
principally to the ceremony of swearing will admit, that the fear of
punishment and the fear of shame in this instance co-operate with the
religious inducement.—Since, then, it is allowed on all hands, that the
veracity of witnesses is the joint result of several causes, it is for
them to shew why it is to be attributed to one of these more than to
another.

When a number of different causes co-operate in the production of a
given effect, it is often a matter of some difficulty to determine which
of the causes is principally instrumental in bringing it about. This
difficulty, however, is removed, if an opportunity presents itself of
examining the effects produced by each of the causes, taken separately.
If we find that one of the causes, when unsupported by the others, is
not followed by any degree of the effect in question, we shall be
intitled to conclude, that in all those cases in which the effect really
takes place, it is to the other causes, and not to this one, that it
ought to be attributed.

This opportunity fortunately presents itself in the case we are
considering. There are several instances in which, although the ceremony
of an oath is employed, neither the laws nor the popular voice enforce
observance of it. If it should appear that in all these cases truth is
uniformly and openly violated, then Edition: current; Page: [14] we
ought to conclude, that whenever judicial mendacity is prevented, we owe
this benefit to the laws and to popular opinion, not to the ceremony of
swearing.

I. It is notorious, that from motives of humanity, but in defiance of
the strongest evidence, Juries frequently condemn a criminal to a milder
punishment than the laws have appropriated to his offence, by finding
him guilty of stealing under the value of 40s. Here the oath of the
Jurymen is flagrantly violated. They have sworn to judge according to
the evidence; but humanity, which dictates the perjury, also prevents
public opinion from censuring the perjured Jurymen. This instance,
therefore, makes it apparent, how slender is the security which an oath
affords, when unsupported by, or at variance with, public opinion.

II. Another most striking instance of the inefficacy of oaths is, the
abuse which is made of them at the Custom House. So notoriously does
every merchant, who imports or exports goods, swear falsely to their
quality and amount, that Custom House oaths have almost passed into a
proverb.1 This perjury, indeed, has for its object to evade certain
laws, which are so admirably contrived for the purpose of fettering
commerce, that if they were rigidly enforced, certain commodities could
not possibly be exported or imported. From the acknowledged absurdity of
the laws, this perjurious evasion of them is not reprobated by public
opinion.

III. Every young man, at his admission into the University of Oxford,
swears to obey certain statutes, drawn up by Archbishop Laud for the
government of the University.2 Now it is well known that no one of these
students ever bestows a single thought upon the observance of these
statutes. The cause of this non-observance is, that from the uselessness
and absurdity of the statutes, public opinion does not enforce obedience
to them. If, however, the ceremony of an oath was of any efficacy in
preventing mendacity, this efficacy would shew itself even in a case
where the obligation is not sanctioned by public opinion. The violation
of the University oath, in every case where its observance interferes in
the slightest degree with the convenience of the swearer, is a complete
proof that the ceremony of swearing affords no security whatever for
veracity in any other case, and that whenever witnesses speak the truth,
it is not because they have sworn, but because they fear punishment and
shame.

The inefficiency of an oath is practically recognized by English
Legislators, and by English Judges, when they admit persons of all
religious denominations to give evidence, after taking an oath according
to the form prescribed by their own religion. For there are some
religions which are acknowledged to have little or no efficacy in
preventing mendacity. Yet we do not find that, ceteris paribus, Edition:
current; Page: [15] less reliance is to be placed on the oaths of one
set of religionists, than of another.

But the law is not even applicable to all Christians, which amounts to
an admission of the inefficacy of oaths to secure good evidence. The
respectable sect of Quakers is freed from the necessity of swearing,3
and yet it is always understood that there is proportionably less false
evidence on the part of the members of that body, than on the part of
the members of any of the swearing sects.

Having thus made it appear that it is not to the influence of religious
motives that good evidence is to be attributed, we might conclude from
analogy that the security we have for useful actions is chiefly
referrable to other sources. This conclusion is farther supported by the
frequency with which duelling and fornication are practised,
notwithstanding the positive manner in which they are forbidden by
Christianity. They are practised merely because public opinion does not,
in these instances, support the dictates of religion. The drinking of
wine in Mahometan countries is another equally striking instance.

From the considerations which we have adduced, all of them notorious
results of experience, it is evident how ill-founded is the argument of
those who defend persecution on the ground which we have combated.

In my next I will endeavour to shew that persecution is not necessary
for the support of Christianity.

Wickliff


7.: FREE DISCUSSION, LETTER III
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 12 FEB., 1823, P. 3

For the context, heading, and entry in Mill’s bibliography, see No. 5.

sir,—

I shall now endeavour to prove that persecution is not necessary for the
preservation of Christianity.

The Christian Religion may be contemplated in two points of view. We may
direct our attention to those peculiar characteristics which distinguish
it from all other doctrines, true or false; or we may consider it with
reference to those properties which it has in common with all true
doctrines, as contradistinguished from false ones.

Not one, but many, arguments might be adduced to prove that
Christianity, considered merely as a true doctrine, could not, under the
influence of free discussion, fail of prevailing over falsehood. This
ground, however, has already been gone over by far abler pens than mine;
and a truth which has been Edition: current; Page: [16] maintained (not
to speak of other writers) by Divines so eminent as Tillotson, Taylor,
Chillingworth, Campbell, Lardner, Lowth, Warburton, Paley, Watson, and
more recently by Hall, cannot stand in need of such feeble support as I
can afford.1

In the present Letter I shall therefore confine myself to the
consideration of those qualities peculiar to Christianity, which render
persecution even less necessary for its support than for that of any
other true doctrine.

And first, let me observe, that the only supposition on which
persecution can be defended—by such of its advocates, I mean, as are
Christians—is that of the utter incapacity and incorrigible imbecility
of the people. That infidels should think persecution essential to the
being of Christianity, can be matter of no surprise; but one who
believes in the truth of the doctrine he supports, can not for a moment
entertain any such opinion, unless he believes what no man, whose
judgment is not biassed by interest, can believe, that the people are
incapable of distinguishing truth from falsehood.

The fact, that the utility of persecution rests on such a basis, would
alone induce every reasonable man to scout the idea of it; but, even
though we were to allow the incapacity of the people, to admit the truth
of all which their worst calumniators have ever imputed to them; it
would not be less true that Christianity can support itself without
persecution, nor, consequently, would the arguments in favour of
toleration be a whit less conclusive.

If a true proposition, and the false one which is opposed to it, are
presented at the same time to the mind of a man who is utterly incapable
of distinguishing truth from error, which of the two is he most likely
to embrace? This question will be found to admit of an easy answer. If
he was before prepossessed in favour of either opinion, that one he will
still continue to hold. If both were equally new to him, he will choose
that which is most flattering to his prevailing passion.

All the prepossessions of those whom it is wished to protect by
persecution from the danger of becoming infidels are uniformly and
confessedly favourable to religion. No where is education, even
partially, in the hands of infidels. There is no place where religion
does not form one of the most essential parts of education. It is not,
therefore, upon this ground, that persecution can be justified.

To counteract the effect of early impressions, it will, no doubt, be
affirmed that infidelity is peculiarly flattering to the passions, and
that those who wish to throw off the shackles of morality will be glad,
in the first instance, to emancipate themselves from the salutary
restraint which religion imposes.

Edition: current; Page: [17]
It was partly with the intention of obviating this objection that my
last letter was penned. There is no use in representing the evils of
infidelity as greater than they really are: nor does a disposition to do
so evince, on the part of him who shews it, any very great anxiety to
vindicate either himself or his religion from the imputation of want of
candour. That infidelity excludes us from the blessings of a future
life, would surely be a sufficient reason to induce every reasonable man
to reject it. I have endeavoured to shew that even if (which God forbid)
all sense of religion were to die away among men, there would still
remain abundant motives to ensure good conduct in this life. The
passions, therefore, are not interested in throwing off religious
belief, or all our ethical writers have been employing their labour to
very little purpose.

Nor is this all. Infidel doctrines are peculiarly ill fitted for making
converts among that portion of mankind who are most in danger of
mistaking falsehood for truth. They bear a greater analogy to general
abstract propositions in metaphysics than to any thing which can
immediately affect the sensitive faculties. Besides, they superinduce
what, to all men not convinced of the necessity of it by the habit of
scientific disquisitions, is the most painful of all states of mind, a
state of doubt. On the other hand, one of the strongest feelings in
every uneducated mind is the appetite for wonder, the love of the
marvellous. Witness the rapid progress of so many religious, which we
now think so unutterably absurd that we wonder how any human being can
ever have given credit to them. This passion is gratified in the most
eminent degree by the Christian religion; for what is there in
Christianity which is not in the highest degree sublime and mysterious?

Against so general and so powerful a feeling, what has scepticism to
oppose? It is not peculiarly fitted to take hold of the imagination; on
the contrary, it is eminently and almost universally repelled by it. If,
then, it had not been evident before, I trust that the considerations I
have adduced will suffice to make it so, that of all the doctrines which
the invention of man ever devised, none is so little likely to prevail
over the contrary doctrine as religious infidelity.

Doctrines which, if left to themselves, have no chance of prevailing,
may be saved from oblivion by persecution. The advocates of infidelity
are active and fearless: no persecution can daunt, no ignominy can
restrain them. By persecution they are raised to an importance which
they could never otherwise have attained: by ignominy they are only
advertised that it is impossible for them to retreat. To prevent them
from diffusing infidelity through the whole kingdom, what has been done
by our well-paid divines? I am not aware that they have yet employed any
other weapon than vague and declamatory abuse. Books indeed there are;
but, alas! what avails a mass of ponderous volumes, written in a style
as little suited to the capacity, as the price at which they are sold is
to the purses, of those for whose use they are principally required? It
is true abuse is far easier, and requires less time and application than
argument. But unless my knowledge Edition: current; Page: [18] of the
duties of Christian Clergymen is very imperfect, they do not receive
one-tenth of the produce of the soil in order that they may attack
infidels by coarse and disgusting abuse, but that they may bring them
back by gentle persuasion within the pale of the Church.

Wickliff


8.: TOOKE’S THOUGHTS ON HIGH AND LOW PRICES [1]
 GLOBE AND TRAVELLER, 4 MAR., 1823, P. 1

Thomas Tooke (1774-1858), another founding member of the Political
Economy Club, became best known for his History of Prices, 6 vols.
(1838-57). His Thoughts and Details on the High and Low Prices of the
Last Thirty Years was published in London by Murray in 1823, with the
Parts separately issued and paginated. This, Mill’s first published
review, appeared in two parts, both headed “Thoughts and Details on the
High and Low Prices of the Last Thirty Years,” with subheadings for the
first, “Part 1.—On the Alterations in the Currency. By Thomas Tooke,
F.R.S.,” and for the second (No. 12), “In Four Parts. Parts II, III, and
IV. By Thomas Tooke, F.R.S.” The first part was his first contribution
to the newly amalgamated Globe and Traveller. The two-part unsigned
review is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A Notice of Part I of Mr.
Tooke’s work on High and Low Prices, which appeared in the Traveller of
4th March 1823” and “A notice of Part II of Mr. Tooke’s work on High and
Low Prices, which appeared in the Chronicle of 9th August 1823”

(MacMinn, p. 2).

mr. tooke’s new work on the High and Low Prices of the last Thirty
Years, promises to be of so great utility in furnishing answers to many
of the usual fallacies, on what is called “the Agricultural Question,”
that we cannot devote our columns to a better purpose than that of
giving a short outline of its contents. The questions, it is true, which
regarded the operation of the Bank Restriction, and subsequently of Mr.
Peel’s Bill,1 were settled long ago by general reasoning to the
satisfaction of every thinking man. As, however, several
well-intentioned, but mistaken individuals, have brought forward in
opposition to conclusions borne out by the most convincing arguments,
certain facts which they assert to be inconsistent with them, we think
that Mr. Tooke has rendered a great service to the British public, in
proving that of these facts, a great proportion are incorrect, and the
remainder perfectly reconcileable to the results of general reasoning.

On the fluctuations of prices during the last thirty years, there are,
says Mr. Tooke, two prevailing opinions. The one attributes the high
prices wholly to the excess of paper, and the present low ones to the
resumption of cash payments. The other ascribes the high prices wholly
to the war, and the low ones to the transition from war to peace. The
advocates of both opinions agree in attributing very little to the
varieties of the seasons.

Edition: current; Page: [19]
These opinions Mr. T. considers as erroneous. He enumerates three
principal causes of the variations in prices:—

1. Alterations in the currency; 2. War, and the return to peace; 3.
Varieties of the seasons. [Pt. I, p. 4.] In the present volume, however,
he confines himself to the first of these causes.

It is allowed on all hands that the Bank Restriction, by producing
over-issues of paper, raised prices to the extent at least of the
difference between the market and Mint prices of gold—that is, to the
degree in which more paper was required to buy an ounce of gold than was
equal to it in nominal amount. This difference, during the whole period
from 1797 to 1814, never exceeded 20 per cent. on the average of three
years, and during the first twelve years after the suspension of cash
payments, averaged no more than about 4 per cent.

But it is a common opinion that the Bank Restriction was the cause, not
only of a rise of prices to this extent, but of a much greater rise.
There is no doubt that many commodities rose in price, not twenty per
cent. merely, but as much as cent. per cent. To prove that this rise was
owing to the Bank Restriction, and consequently the present low prices
to the resumption of cash payments, three arguments are employed:—

1. That the value of the precious metals, in the commercial world, was
lowered by the exportation of gold from England, in consequence of the
Bank Restriction, and raised again by the re-importation produced by a
return to a metallic currency. The value, therefore, of the currency
varied more than is indicated by its fall relatively to gold, since gold
itself had fallen in value.

2. That the compulsory paper system lowered the value of money by
introducing expedients to economise the use of it, which was equivalent
to an increase of its quantity.

3. That a progressive rise of prices accompanied a progressive increase
of paper, which affords a strong presumption that the latter was the
cause of the former.2

Mr. Tooke proceeds to examine these arguments.

The first he answers by showing that the quantity of gold set at liberty
by the Bank Restriction was not sufficient to lower the value of gold
above one per cent.; that this was compensated by the great demand for
gold, for the use of the Continental armies, &c. That in like manner the
drain of gold on the Continent, for re-importation into England, was
compensated by the cessation of the extraordinary demand. These
conclusions he further confirms by an adduction of facts relative to the
value of precious metals in France. [Pt. I, pp. 21-42, and 212-15.]

Edition: current; Page: [20]
As to the second alleged effect, that of heightening the expedients for
economising the circulating medium, Mr. T. admits that it took place;
but he proves by conclusive arguments that it did not arise from the
Bank Restriction; that, moreover, at the time when it occurred, and for
some years after, the amount of currency was not increased, but
diminished, while, from the increased money transactions of the country,
the demand for currency was increased—two circumstances which fully
compensated for the virtual increase of the circulating medium. The
expedients for economising the currency are still in operation as
before. If they had raised prices, they ought to have prevented them
from falling. [Pt. I, pp. 43-50.]

The Bank Restriction is supposed to have further contributed to lower
the value of money by increasing the issue of country paper, and thus
substituting credit for currency. Mr. T. however, proves, that except to
the degree indicated by the price of gold, the increase and diminution
of country paper, which took place at various periods during the
Restriction, were not simultaneous with the increase and diminution of
Bank of England paper, and depended upon causes entirely different. [Pt.
I, pp. 50-62.]

Mr. T. next considers the alleged connection between the Bank
Restriction and a progressive rise of prices. In order to meet this
assertion, he passes in review all the variations of prices which have
taken place during the last 30 years: he shows that during the first
seven years after the Bank Restriction, instead of a progressive rise,
there was a decided fall in the price of corn: that the subsequent
fluctuations were in no way dependent on the Bank Restriction, except to
the degree indicated by the price of gold; but were referable to other
causes. These are, the variations of the seasons, and the variations in
the amount of private paper and credit, arising from speculation and
over-trading; which Mr. Tooke also analyses, and refers to their real
sources. [Pt. I, pp. 63-168.]

He then anticipates an objection, viz. that were it not for the Bank
Restriction, these variations of private paper and credit would either
not have taken place, or not to so great a degree.—Mr. T. however,
proves, from the examples of Hamburg, the United States of America, and
this country before the Bank Restriction, that great variations in
private credit are by no means peculiar to a system of unconvertible
paper money. [Pt. I, pp. 169-76.]

Finally, he inquires into the immediate cause of the present low prices,
and shows that they are by no means lower than the excess of supply over
demand, which is well ascertained to exist, will account for. [Pt. I,
pp. 184-98.]

We must now take our leave of Mr. Tooke for the present; we shall take
an early opportunity to resume the consideration of this important
subject.3 In the mean time, we earnestly recommend to such of our
readers as desire to understand thoroughly the Agricultural and Currency
questions, to peruse with attention this well-timed and highly-useful
production.

Edition: current; Page: [21]


9.: THE DEBATE ON THE PETITION OF MARY ANN CARLILE
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 9 MAY, 1823, P. 3

Mill’s article is associated by him in the Autobiography with his
letters on Free Discussion (Nos. 5-7): “a paper which I wrote soon after
[them] on the same subject, à propos of a debate in the House of
Commons, was inserted as a leading article” (CW, Vol. I, p. 91). The
occasion was the debate, initiated by Joseph Hume (1777-1855), Radical
M.P. and lifelong friend of James Mill, in speeches of 26 Mar.,
presenting the Petition of Mary Ann Carlile for Release from
Imprisonment (PD, n.s., Vol. 8, cols. 709-16), and of 8 May, presenting
the Petition of Richard Carlile Complaining of the Seizure of His
Property (ibid., Vol. 9, cols. 114-15). Richard Carlile complained that,
as a result of the seizure of his goods, he was unable to pay his fine
and was subject to perpetual imprisonment. Mary Ann Carlile (b. 1794),
his sister, on the instigation of the Society for the Suppression of
Vice, had been sentenced to one year’s imprisonment and a fine of £500
for selling, in her brother’s shop, a pamphlet, An Appendix to the
Theological Works of Thomas Paine. Mill’s first leading article,
unheaded and anonymous as they are in all such journals, is described in
his bibliography as “Observations on the debate concerning the petition
of Mary Ann Carlile, which appeared as a leading article in the
Chronicle of [9th May] 1823”

(MacMinn, p. 2).

we are not of the number of those who have no praise but for the times
that are past. We think, on the contrary, the present time, on the
whole, better than any former time. There are, for instance,
unquestionably a much greater number of intelligent and enlightened men
in this country now than it has ever contained at any former period. But
while we willingly admit the general superiority of the age, we are not
blind to its defects. There is, in particular, one feature belonging to
it which we cannot contemplate with satisfaction. We allude to the
mental cowardice which prevents men from giving expression to their
conviction, and the insincerity which leads them to express what they do
not think. A certain assembly has fully its share of this want of
singleness of heart and pusillanimity. No man who knows any thing of the
world can listen for any length of time to the language used in the
assembly in question, without perceiving that the fear of offending in
this quarter, and the desire to please in that, rather than
conscientious conviction, too often actuates the speakers. There are
certainly some distinguished exceptions, who scorn to sacrifice on the
altar of timidity or machiavelism, and of these we think Mr. Hume
unquestionably one. The unshrinking firmness with which he grapples with
the subjects that come before him, without turning to the right hand or
the left, has indeed not been lost, either on the country or on the
House. We doubt, for instance, whether another Member of any standing in
the House could have been found to present and enforce the Petition from
Mary Ann Carlile which he brought forward some weeks ago, though the
grounds on which he supported that Petition were such as to make a
strong impression on the House, and a still stronger on the country. But
taking counsel only from his own conscience, being actuated by a sincere
Edition: current; Page: [22] desire to rescue that religion of which we
deem him a sincere believer and friend, from the odium which false or
less judicious friends were throwing on it, and listening to the counsel
of the most eminent advocates of Christianity, the most illustrious
ornaments of the Church of England, when its higher places were not
deemed the almost exclusive portion of the Nobility, he hesitated not to
raise his voice in favour of equal law and free discussion, which were
wounded in the case of this individual. The result proved, that it was a
mere phantom, at which others had taken fright, and the advocates of
persecution and of partiality were found unequal to a contest which only
exposed them to ridicule.

Last night he presented a Petition from Richard Carlile, an individual
whom an injudicious activity has of late brought so much into notice.
Alluding to the prejudices against this man, he stated as the result of
his inquiries respecting him, that “he was one of the best moral
characters in England,” that “his religious opinion might differ from
that of some other persons, but that that did not affect his moral
character; and he would dare any one to contradict him, when he said
that as a husband, as a father, as head of a family, and as a neighbour,
Mr. Carlile might challenge calumny itself.”1 This was cheered by the
Ministerial Benches, not probably because they who cheered knew whether
Carlile was a moral or immoral man, but because they thought Mr. Hume
had got on ticklish ground, by allowing the probability of a notorious
infidel being moral. But we are not to hold religion in less esteem,
when we find that faith does not uniformly produce good works, any more
than we are to deem it unnecessary to the support of morality, because
we find occasionally moral individuals without a due sense of religion.
“An unbeliever [says Bishop Sanderson], awed sometimes by the law of
natural conscience, may manifest much simplicity and integrity of heart;
and the true child of God, swayed sometimes with the law of sinful
concupiscence, may bewray much foul hypocrisie and infidelity.”2 It is
only injuring the cause of religion to attribute more either to it, or
to the absence of it, than is consistent with the truth; and the most
respectable Christian writers, though they justly observe that religion
and honesty are most frequently found together, are ready at the same
time to allow that they are sometimes found separate. We never for
instance heard it questioned that Mr. Owen of New Lanark is a very moral
man.3 On the other hand, we have doubts whether M. de Chateaubriand was
a much more honest man when he brought water from the River Jordan for
the baptism of the King of Rome, or is so even now, than when “shocked
at the abuse of some of the Institutions of Christianity and at the
vices Edition: current; Page: [23] of some of its professors, he
suffered himself to be misled by sophistry and gave way to
declamation.”4

It is curious to see what very different notions have prevailed on this
subject within a comparatively short period. Addison thought Catholicism
worse than infidelity, because the former was incompatible with
morality, while the latter was not.5 Bishop Sanderson seemed to think
the Atheists, whom he supposed to be more numerous than either Papists
or Sectaries, principally dangerous from the possibility of their
joining the Catholics.

Neither, [says he,] will the supposed (and I fear truly supposed)
greater number of Atheists, than either Papists or Sectaries, be any
hinderance to the Papists for finally prevailing. Because it is not for
the interest of the Atheist and his religion (pardon the boldness of the
catachresis) to engage either for or against any side farther than a
jeer, but to let them fight it out, keep himself quiet till they have
done, and then clap in with him that getteth the day. He that is of no
religion can make a shift to be of any rather than suffer. And the
Atheist, though he be in truth and in heart neither Protestant nor
Papist, nor any thing else; yet can he be in face and outward
comportment either Protestant or Papist, or any thing else (Jew or Turk,
if need be) as will best serve his present turn.6

If Catholicism were incompatible with morality, we should be rather in
an awkward plight in the present day, for notwithstanding the aid which
infidelity has received of late by the publicity given to it at the
expence of the Constitutional Association,7 we suspect (so much has
Atheism gone down since the worthy Bishop’s time), that the Atheists are
now less numerous than even the Priests of the Catholics, leaving out of
the account the flocks. We say nothing of the number of the other
sectaries, as this is a much sorer point than that of the number of
Atheists, from which we believe no Church Establishment will ever be in
much danger.

The question of last night, however, was not so much free discussion
itself, as the injustice which had been committed under a sentence
levelled against it. On the subject of the severity which had been
displayed, Mr. Lennard forcibly Edition: current; Page: [24] observed
“that the supporters of the Six Acts, having failed in their efforts to
procure the punishment of perpetual banishment, as was contemplated, had
still continued through the agency of the Judges to supply that
deficiency by sentences which amounted to perpetual imprisonment.”8 Mr.
Denman, indeed, offered an apology for the Judges that “had they been
aware of the inability of Mr. Carlile to pay the fine at the time
judgment was passed, he was sure they never would have passed it.”9 But
this apology does not, at all events, apply to the case of Mary Ann
Carlile, with respect to whose means to pay the fine imposed on her
there never could be the smallest doubt.

Religion disclaims those who would advance her cause by the mean
expedients to which Mr. Hume alluded last night. Let good ends be
promoted by fair and upright means. The equal administration of law is
due to the Infidel as well as to the Christian. Give not to the Infidel
any advantage from your disgracing a good cause by disreputable means.
In the words of Bishop Warburton, “Can any but an enthusiast believe
that he may use guile to promote the glory of God—the wisdom from above
is without partiality and without hypocrisy. Partiality consists in
dispensing an unequal measure in our transactions with others: hypocrisy
in attempting to cover that unequal measure by prevarication and false
pretences.”10 And in the words of a man less learned, perhaps, but not
less upright than Bishop Warburton, we mean the worthy John Wesley, “no
man living is authorised to break or dispensed with in breaking any law
of morality.”11

The discussions have done, and will do, good, and we trust Mr. Hume will
return to the subject. The Courts of Law must profit by them. “Shame,
albeit the daughter of sinne, becomes sometimes the mother of
conversion; and when all good motions else seem mere strangers, this one
is admitted as a profitable, though unwelcome guest.”12

Edition: current; Page: [25]


10.: THE DEBATE ON EAST AND WEST INDIA SUGARS
 GLOBE AND TRAVELLER, 7 JUNE, 1823, P. 3

This article was preceded by an editorial comment: “The following
article on this question, from our Correspondent, has long been omitted
for want of room. Though our Correspondent treats the interests of the
West Indians rather cavalierly, the power of his arguments entitle [sic]
him to attention.” The delay was not very long, for the debate in the
House of Commons took place on 22 May (PD, n.s., Vol. 9, cols. 444-67),
just two days after Mill’s seventeenth birthday, on which day he joined
his father in the Examiner’s Office of the East India Company (which was
interested in East India sugar). The leading article, headed “East and
West India Sugars,” is described in Mill’s bibliography as “Strictures
on the Debate concerning East and West India sugars, which appeared in
the Globe and Traveller of [7th June] 1823”

(MacMinn, p. 2).

the debate in the house of commons, on Thursday the 22d ult., upon Mr.
Whitmore’s proposal for equalizing the duties on East and West India
Sugar, is remarkable, not only for the able and argumentative speeches
of Mr. Ricardo and Mr. Whitmore, but for the unprecedented exposure
which their opponents made of the weakness of their cause.1

There are two arguments against the monopoly, either of which would be
conclusive, but when combined, they are irresistible. One of these
applies to this in common with all other monopolies, that they enhance
the price to the consumer. The other argument applies peculiarly to the
West India monopoly, that it perpetuates Negro Slavery.

To these arguments, no answer was or could be made. A cry, however,
could be raised against them; and this has been done. The great
objection of the West India Gentlemen to the abrogation of the monopoly
is this: “It would ruin us.” Supposing this to be true, it accounts
perfectly for their disapprobation of the measure; but it may not,
perhaps, be so all-important a consideration in the eyes of the
philosopher as it is in theirs. When a Government has made laws for the
protection of a particular class—that is, laws to enable them to pillage
the rest of the community for their own benefit, it can never happen
that no expectations will be founded on those laws, no calculations
bottomed upon their stability. This may be a reason for making the
abrogation a gradual one; but it can never be a reason for allowing the
nuisance to be perpetual, inasmuch as the interest of the Edition:
current; Page: [26] many is preferable to that of the few. No great
reform can ever be effected without producing distress somewhere; and
the greater the benefit the greater will be the distress. If the public
has been robbed of a great advantage, to retard the ruin of the West
India Planters, this advantage cannot be restored to the public without
deeply affecting the interest of those Gentlemen. But if this were a
reason for allowing the abuse which perpetuates Slavery to exist, there
are few abuses for which as good an argument might not be found.

In point of fact, however, it is not by the rejection of Mr. Whitmore’s
motion, that the ruin can be averted which has so long been impending
over our Sugar Colonies. It is not many years since the whole continent
of Europe was supplied with Sugar from the West Indies. Our Colonies not
only possessed a monopoly of the English market, but furnished a large
supply for re-exportation. These were the days of West Indian
prosperity. But for some time past, the Continent of Europe has derived
by far the greater part of its supply from other sources; and the price
of Sugar on the Continent has fallen below the lowest rate at which the
West Indies could supply it. Excluded thus from the Continental market,
colonial Sugar experienced an unexampled depression of price, which was
further enhanced by the influx from Demerara and the other
newly-acquired Colonies.

This depression must be permanent, or can be remedied only by the
removal of a large capital from the production of Sugar to other
employments: for at present our Colonies produce and send annually to
market a far greater quantity than the consumption of England requires.
Hence it is that Mr. Marryatt had to present a petition from a body of
Planters in Trinidad, “who did not derive one shilling of profit from
four hundred thousand pounds of capital which they had invested, but, on
the contrary, sustained considerable losses from the depression in the
price of Colonial produce.”2 At present, therefore, as Mr. Ricardo has
justly observed, the admission of East India produce would not enhance
the distress, for the price is already as low as it would be if the
competition were open.3 But it would do what is of equal importance; it
would prevent Sugar from ever rising again to a monopoly price. To
reject a measure from its tendency to lower the price of Sugar, when
Sugar is at a losing price, and cannot for many years be expected to
rise again, might only tend to delude the West India Planters by false
hopes, and aggravate their distress by disappointment.

The minor objections of the West India Gentlemen are to the last degree
futile. It is scarcely necessary to give more than a bare statement of
them.

As for instance—Mr. Ellis says that by acquiring new colonies we pledged
Edition: current; Page: [27] ourselves to support the colonial system.4
This is to say, that if we ever were ignorant enough to think Colonies
an advantage, and to act upon that persuasion, we thereby pledge
ourselves never to correct our errors.

For another specimen of this Gentleman’s mode of arguing, he tells us
that it is unjust to deprive the Colonies of their peculiar advantages,
unless, at the same time, we take off the peculiar restrictions under
which they labour.5 This is not a reason for leaving both evils, but for
taking them both away. The monopoly is an evil; the restrictions are
another, and a very great evil. There is nothing which we more ardently
desire than to get rid of both. But, according to Mr. Ellis, we are to
retain the one evil on its own account, and the other because it would
be unjust to take it away and leave the former alone.

Another argument of a similar stamp was used by Mr. Marryatt—namely,
that the East India Company is a monopoly: “Gentlemen who deprecated
monopoly, with the profits of monopoly in their pockets, would be much
better employed in declaiming against it in Leadenhall-street than in
that House.”6 And why not in both? Should the existence of one evil
secure another from attack? Nay, more—if we can obtain the co-operation
in destroying one evil, even of those who profit by the other, why
should we not gratefully accept of it? Evils would seldom be removed if
those who attack them were to refuse all aid but from persons who agree
in all their opinions.

It is worthy of remark, that while Mr. Ellis opposes the admission of
East India Sugar, because too much would come, Mr. Robertson opposes it
because no Sugar would come at all. If we may believe him, the East
Indies are not only incapable of exporting Sugar—they are even under the
necessity of importing it.7 Be it so. Mr. Ellis’s alarm, then, is
ill-founded; and there is no danger of ruining the Colonies by granting
a permission of which no use can be made. We desire no more than a fair
trial. But Mr. Robertson, in his wisdom, has discovered, that “the
consumers of this country would be materially injured.”8 How injured? By
purchasing their Sugar too cheap? But they desire no better than to be
injured in this way. By being forced to pay too high a price for it? But
how can this be, when, at the worst, they can obtain it from the West
Indies at the same price as before!

It would appear that the West India Gentlemen differ in every thing
else, and agree only in condemning the proposed measure. While Mr.
Robertson contends Edition: current; Page: [28] that do what we will we
can never get an ounce of Sugar from the East Indies, Mr. Marryatt
thinks that the admission of East India Sugars would “lead to so general
a growth of Sugars, as must prove highly injurious, by glutting the
markets both here and on the Continent.”9 It is the ruined West India
Planters, we suppose, who are thus all on a sudden to extend their
cultivation. Or if the glut is to come from the East Indies, this proves
that—in the opinion, at least, of Mr. Marryatt—Sugar can be grown
cheaper in the East Indies than in the West.—We would recommend to this
Gentleman the propriety of imposing restrictions upon the trade of
making shoes, with a view to prevent a glut of that article. To whom is
this glut, as it is called, injurious? To the consumer? No; to him it is
a benefit. To the producer? But it is quite evident that the East India
cultivator can never permanently sell his Sugar below the price which
will repay the cost of production with the ordinary profit. And the
consumer would be greatly injured if he could sell it higher. If,
indeed, a merchant has a stock of Sugar on sale, the proposed measure
may be injurious to him. But why? Simply because it lowers the price,
and benefits the consumer. Mr. Marryatt’s reasoning would go to prevent
all improvements in agriculture or manufactures. There is none of these
which does not cause a “glut”—that is, lower the price to the consumer.

Mr. K. Douglas treats the subject as if it were a question of charity.
The Sugar Trade can be “no object” either to the Hindoos or the British
residents. Mr. Whitmore has proved conclusively, that, far from being no
object, it is among the greatest of objects to the East Indies.10
Suppose, however, that it really were “no object” to the natives or
British residents, unfortunately for the argument of Mr. Douglas, there
is a third class of persons—namely, the consumers. What should we think
if we were compelled to buy hats or shoes, not where we could get them
best or cheapest, but where it is the greatest “object” to the seller?

We are informed by Mr. Ellis and Mr. Marryatt, that the “mercantile
marine of the West Indies, contributed to support the naval power of
Great Britain.”11 We had thought that the day for this sort of cant was
gone by; that even in the House of Commons, at this time of day, the
mention of the Navigation Laws12 would excite a laugh. Surely no one can
now be deceived by it. Can any one seriously think it possible, that a
country rich and commercial like Great Britain, can labour under so
great a deficiency of ships and seamen, that it should be Edition:
current; Page: [29] necessary for her to continue a branch of commerce
where there is not only no gain, but an actual loss, merely for the
purpose of having a nursery for seamen! Who can doubt that even if the
West India commerce were to cease altogether, the ships and seamen now
employed by it would speedily find employment in bringing from the East
Indies what they formerly brought from the West! For the longer voyage,
indeed, more ships and seamen would be required; and if they be Lascars,
what then?—Are not Lascars as good as any other seamen?

Mr. Ellis, moreover, tells us that the proposed measure would deprive
the negroes of employment.13 Can any thing more effectually deprive them
of employment, than the present unexampled, but permanent, depression of
price? Waiving, however, this consideration, the calamity with which we
are menaced by Mr. Ellis is no calamity, but one of the greatest of
blessings. We desire nothing more than that the negroes should be
without employment. It is the prelude to their final emancipation. What
was impracticable when the labour of negroes produced an abundant
profit, will be easy when they are a dead weight about the necks of
their employers. This alone would be far more than a counterpoise to the
most terrific evil which could befal a few West India Planters. They
could scarcely be put in a worse condition than their own slaves.

That Mr. Ellis, or any of his supporters, should talk rather unwisely,
can be matter of surprise to no one; but we confess we did not expect to
hear such a sentence as the following from the mouth of Mr. Huskisson:
“If it was true that the production of slavery was more costly than that
of free labour, that would be an additional reason for not depriving him
[the slave holder] of the advantage of his protecting duty.”14 That is,
the greater the mischief the greater the reward. What! is it not enough
that we should be compelled to fee the planter for employing slaves?
Must the fee be even greater because that kind of labour is not only
cruel but unproductive? Is he to be rewarded not only for doing evil,
but for going out of his way to do it?

To crown all, Mr. Douglas thinks, that “a great deal of mischief is
likely to result from the frequent agitation of this question.”15 What a
speech for a legislator! We remember that when a cry was first raised
against the abominations of the Slave Trade—when benevolent
Philanthropists, both in and out of Parliament, lifted up their voices,
for a long time unsuccessfully, in earnest reprobation of that atrocious
traffic—then too we were warned of the “mischief which was likely to
result from the frequent agitation of this Edition: current; Page: [30]
question.”16 The slave-owners, indeed, felt, very deservedly, the
mischief which resulted to them from it. But we have learned to be
suspicious of those questions from the agitation of which mischief
ensues.

To conclude—this debate is a striking exemplification of the evils
arising from the present constitution of the House of Commons. On one
side are liberal principles—the interest of the consumer, and above all,
the interest of the slave, for which so many Members express unbounded
zeal, and which all affect to consider of supreme importance—on the
other side is the personal interest of a few West India Planters and
Merchants—personal interest and nothing more. There are few evils at all
comparable in magnitude to this, and the removal of which, at the
present moment, would produce so little suffering; yet personal interest
carries the day by a majority of 161 to 34.

It has been urged as an objection against plans for giving the people a
control over their Representatives, that the people would certainly be
in error on certain questions of political economy. On some, perhaps,
they might, though even this is doubtful; but in a case like the
present, where the contest is between liberal principles and the
interest of a small number of individuals, the worst enemies of the
people cannot affirm that they would be in error. Yet, on such
questions, the House of Commons almost uniformly goes wrong; and there
can be no doubt that personal interest, if it does not immediately
dictate the vote, at least prevents the voter from applying his mind so
as to understand the subject, and leaves him, even when
well-intentioned, to the artful guidance of an interested Minister.


11.: JUDICIAL OATHS
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 25 JULY, 1823, P. 3

This letter was occasioned by the assize report in the Morning
Chronicle, 22 July, p. 4, under the heading “Worcester, July 18th (Last
Day.) / Before Mr. Justice Park. / Forgery,” of the trial of Thomas
Pidgeon, a cattle dealer, for forgery, before James Alan Park
(1763-1838). Headed as title and subheaded “To the Editor of the Morning
Chronicle,” the letter is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A letter
on Judicial Oaths, signed No Lawyer, which appeared in the Chronicle of
23d [sic] July 1823”

(MacMinn, p. 2).

sir,—

In your paper of Tuesday, 22d July, I see a new instance of the mode in
which the ends of justice are frustrated by the useless and
demoralising, not to say unchristian, ceremony of an oath.

Edition: current; Page: [31]
An individual who was capitally indicted for presenting a forged check
to a Quaker clerk in the banking-house of Whitehead and Co. at
Shipston-upon-Stour, was acquitted from the insufficiency of evidence;
the Judge, however, appearing convinced that if the scruples of the
Quakers had permitted them to give evidence upon oath, the prisoner
would in all probability have been convicted.

The express prohibition of oaths, which we find in the Gospel, couched
in the emphatic words “Swear not at all,”1 has been disregarded, on the
ground of expediency, under the supposition that our Saviour could never
have intended to prohibit oaths, in any case where they could be proved
to be expedient.

To the general principle of this assumption I cannot object, as it would
be impiety to ascribe to our Saviour any injunction, the observance of
which is not consistent with that greatest of blessings, a good
administration of justice. I have noticed the assumption merely to shew,
that if oaths can be justified, it must be on the ground of expediency,
and if they cannot be supported on this ground, they ought to be
abolished altogether.

Now it has long been recognised by all men of understanding, that an
honest man’s word is as good as his oath. And the same may be said of a
rogue. But it has been supposed that between these extremes there is a
middle point; that some who are sunk low enough in guilt to have lost
all compunction at simple mendacity, still retain a degree of reverence
for the ceremony of an oath.

It is well known that public opinion sets more strongly against the
violation of an oath, than against that of a simple affirmation; and
what if this circumstance should be adequate to account for the
difference in the binding force of the two engagements?

When several motives co-operate in producing a given line of action, and
when it is desired to ascertain which of the given causes contributes
most to their joint effect, there is, I apprehend, only one course to be
pursued. The several motives are to be observed when acting separately,
and the effects are to be compared which each of them produces, when
divested of the co-operating inducements.

When I apply this analytic process to the two sanctions, that of an
oath, and that of public opinion, I find the latter continually
producing effects of the most tremendous magnitude—I find men readily
marching up to the cannon’s mouth in the pursuit of public esteem and
applause; but if I consider the ceremony of an oath when disjoined from
the co-operating force of public opinion, I find it utterly disregarded,
without the hesitation of a moment.

Of this, one of the most remarkable examples is that of Custom-house
oaths. It is well known that the individuals who are sent with goods to
the Custom-house, swear readily to their nature and amount, without
having ever opened the chests Edition: current; Page: [32] in which they
are contained. In Scotland, a country where the religious spirit
certainly is not deficient, a law once existed, which imposed higher
duties upon French than upon Spanish wine. The inconveniences of this
law were soon felt; public opinion ceased to enforce its observation,
and we are told by Lord Kaimes that it was constantly evaded by all who
were interested in doing so, through the simple expedient of swearing
the French wine to be Spanish.2 The statutes of the University of
Oxford, which were drawn up by Archbishop Laud, contain a variety of
regulations of a frivolous and harassing nature.3 These statutes, all
the students swear to observe; but from their absurdity, they are not
supported by public opinion; accordingly they are openly violated, not
on some occasions merely, but whenever their observance involves the
most trifling sacrifice either of ease or of pleasure. Who, then, will
venture to assert that the binding force of oaths can be ascribed to the
religious obligation? The religious part of the ceremony is not more
binding in a judicial, than in a Custom-house oath. But in the former
case the obligation is enforced by public opinion; in the latter it is
not: accordingly, in the one case it is openly violated; in the other it
is observed.

Since then the ceremony does not contribute in any degree to secure the
veracity of witnesses, it may be, and ought to be, abolished. Nor is
this profanation of the name of God frivolous only and nugatory, it is
productive of many very serious mischiefs. Of these I shall instance
only one, but that one is of unspeakable importance; whenever an oath is
part of the formalities of a judicial affirmation, people soon learn to
consider it as the binding part. When Judges charge the jury, or address
the prisoner in cases of perjury, they take no notice of the misery
which he has in all probability occasioned, the ruin possibly of many
individuals—they do not remind him that he has done all which depended
upon him to poison the fountain of security and happiness to the people,
by frustrating the ends of judicature, by causing the acquittal of a
guilty, or the punishment of an innocent individual. It is not from
these circumstances that they draw the aggravation, or even the original
criminality of the offence. No; it is because he has forsworn himself
before the Deity—it is because he has disregarded the awful name of God,
that he is guilty and deserving of punishment; a reason equally
applicable to the blasphemous exclamations of dustmen and coalheavers in
the streets, and tending to place these trivial indiscretions on a level
with the most pernicious, without exception, of all crimes—judicial
perjury.

Such being the style in which the obligation of judicial veracity is
spoken of by the Judges themselves—the people soon learn to consider the
profanation of the religious ceremony as the principal part of the
crime. This cannot increase their Edition: current; Page: [33]
detestation of mendacity, when aggravated by perjury: but it greatly
diminishes their abhorrence of the same offence, whenever the ceremony
of an oath has been omitted. Examine the cases in which judicial
evidence is taken, without the aid of an oath; and if you find
mendacity, in those instances, more frequent, you cannot ascribe it to
the absence of the religious ceremony, which the Custom-house and
University oaths prove to be wholly void of influence; but you must
necessarily attribute this lamentable effect to the demoralizing
influence of judicial oaths, which, by diverting the minds of men from
the real to the nominal guilt, greatly diminish the horror with which
false evidence, as such, would otherwise be regarded.

Mr. Justice Park, with his accustomed liberality, took occasion from the
trial in question to inveigh against the prejudices of the Quakers. I
myself, Sir, am no Quaker; but I think that a man to whom justice is
thus denied, because he will not violate what he considers to be his
duty, deserves more tender treatment, at the hands at least of Mr.
Justice Park, and might fairly retort the accusation of prejudice upon
his Lordship, who is willing thus openly to frustrate the ends of
justice, for the preservation of a frivolous, nugatory, and demoralizing
ceremony.

The absurdity of the exclusion is recognised by the law itself, since
Quakers are admitted, in civil cases, to give evidence by simple
affirmation.4 The law does not presume that on a civil action, a Quaker
will give false evidence, because he will not profane the name of God;
why should it set up a contrary presumption in criminal cases, where the
accused party having more at stake, a conscientious man (and the Quakers
are generally speaking the most conscientious of all religious sects)
would be, if possible, more cautious than ever in giving his evidence?
It is absurd to suppose that criminal cases are either of more
importance, or more exposed to the danger of perjury, than civil ones. A
cause where the whole earthly resources, perhaps, of innumerable
families concerned may well compete in importance with a prosecution for
stealing a cow or a sheep. And where the interests at stake are equal,
the motives to perjury are the same.

In the instance of Quakers, and in all similar instances, it has been
well remarked by Mr. Ricardo, in his able speech in favour of free
discussion, that the presumption of veracity is not weaker, but
stronger, from the very circumstance of their not consenting to violate
what they conceive to be a sacred duty of the highest order.5

I am, Sir, yours, with the greatest respect,
 No Lawyer.

Edition: current; Page: [34]


12.: TOOKE’S THOUGHTS ON HIGH AND LOW PRICES [2]
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 9 AUG., 1823, P. 3

For the context, heading, and entry in Mill’s bibliography for this
second half of a two-part review, see No. 8.

it will be remembered that we have already noticed the First Part of
this well-timed and highly useful production.1 The remaining Three Parts
are now before the public.

Three opinions prevail concerning the circumstances which occasioned the
prosperity of the Agricultural Classes during the interval from 1792 to
1812, and their distress during the greater part of the ten years which
followed that period.

By Mr. Western, Mr. Attwood, and their followers, the prosperity of the
agriculturists is attributed to the depreciation of the currency, and
their distress to the resumption of cash payments.2 By another class of
reasoners, the high prices are attributed to the operation of the
war—the low prices to the transition from war to peace. There is still
another opinion, that the variations of prices were owing to
circumstances of temporary operation, principally to the vicissitudes of
the seasons.

In Part I of his work, published a few months since, Mr. Tooke gave a
detailed examination of the opinion which attributes the high and low
prices to the variations in the amount of the currency. He undertook to
prove that these variations could not affect prices to any greater
extent than was indicated by the difference in value between paper and
gold. In support of this assertion, he first adduced general reasoning,
which alone sufficed to prove the absurdity of attributing to
depreciation any greater effect: but as there are many, who, not being
capable of comprehending general reasoning, are inclined to regard it
with distrust, Mr. Tooke fortified his position by a statement of facts,
proving conclusively that during the last 30 years enhancement of prices
was seldom, if ever, coincident with increase in the issues of Bank
paper, but was sometimes coincident with a diminution. To attribute,
therefore, any considerable part of the Edition: current; Page: [35]
enhancement to depreciation, is inconsistent not only with principle,
but with facts—not only with general, but with specific experience.

In Part II just published, Mr. T. proceeds to the examination of the
doctrine which attributes the high prices to the effect of war, and the
subsequent fall to the transition from war to peace.

Two questions here arise. First—Whether the taxation attending a state
of war is calculated to raise prices? Next—How far prices can be
affected by war, through the medium of supply and demand?

First, as to taxation. [Pt. II, pp. 1-6.] Direct taxes, such as an
income tax, if equally levied upon all classes, are never supposed to
affect prices. Taxes levied upon particular commodities will usually
raise the prices of those commodities, but there is never any reason why
they should raise general prices, while, under some circumstances, they
may lower them. If the commodities taxed be the instruments of
production, the effect upon prices will vary according to circumstances.
If, for instance, the taxes apply equally, or nearly equally, to all
branches of industry, they cannot raise prices; but, if they are laid on
the instruments of production of some particular article, and not of
others, that article must advance in price.

From this analysis of the influence of taxation upon prices, it appears
that the high range of general prices during the war cannot be
attributed to taxation. To this argument Mr. T. adds a further
confirmation, by the fact, that with the exception of the Income Tax,
the amount of taxation (including Land Tax, Tithe and Poor-rate,) down
to last summer was as great as during the war. [P. 4.] If therefore
taxation had raised prices, taxation must have prevented them from
falling.

Independently of taxation war could have raised prices only by creating
demand, or by obstructing supply.

Those who affirm that war increased demand, think that the whole of the
extra government expenditure creates a new source of demand; that not
only the prices of naval and military stores are raised, but that the
additional consumption of fleets and armies must raise the price of
food; that the demand for soldiers and sailors must raise wages; also
the increased demand for manufactures to supply fleets and armies must
farther raise wages, and thus increase the consumption by the labouring
classes, &c.

This would be true if the extra government expenditure consisted of new
funds; but these reasoners forget that what is consumed by government
comes out of the pockets of the people, and would by them have been
expended in the purchase of labour and commodities. In this way,
therefore, war cannot raise prices. It can only raise those commodities
which are the objects of sudden demand, such as naval and military
stores, and these only until the supply has accommodated itself to the
demand.

Accordingly, it appears that for 100 years previous to 1793, exclusively
of Edition: current; Page: [36] taxed or imported commodities, and naval
or military stores, there was as low a range of prices during war as
during peace. This Mr. T. proves by a table of prices. [Pp.
14-20.]—Wheat, indeed, was at a lower price during the expensive war
preceding the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle3 than during any other part of
the whole period from 1688 to 1792.

Besides, it is notorious that the consumption of food has been
considerably increased during the low prices since the peace. It is not,
therefore, extra consumption which raised prices during the war, since
in that case it would have prevented them from falling during the peace.

It has also been contended, that prices were greatly affected by the
monopoly which, from our ascendancy at sea, the war conferred on our
trade. But the very articles which were the subject of that monopoly
were more depressed in 1810 and 1812, than they have been either before
or since. An ordinary monopoly raises prices by limiting the supply; but
the supply of Colonial produce, and the other commodities which were the
objects of our exclusive trade, was greatly increased during the war,
while it was only the export of them which was restricted. The price
therefore fell.

Mr. Tooke next considers to what extent war may have operated in raising
prices by limiting the supply. [Pp. 47-61.]

This it may have done, either by a diminution of reproduction or by
impeding commerce. Now although the tendency of war is to diminish
production, no one asserts that the country has retrograded during the
war: production cannot, therefore, have been actually diminished. The
only mode in which the war can have affected supply must have been by
impeding commerce. And it is certain that by enhancing greatly the cost
of importation, it did operate to raise the prices of imported
commodities. In ordinary years, however, we never imported agricultural
produce. War, therefore, could raise agricultural prices only by
preventing relief from abroad, to that scarcity which was produced by
other causes at home.

Mr. T. therefore concludes that war could affect prices only in as far
as it obstructed importation, and created a demand for naval and
military stores. [Pp. 58-60.] It is therefore wholly inadequate to
account for the high range of prices during the 20 years following 1793.

Part III is devoted to the examination of that opinion which attributes
principally to the vicissitudes of the season the great variations in
prices during the last ten years. [Pt. III, pp. 9-48.] This opinion Mr.
T. has, we think, proved to be perfectly correct, and adequate to the
explanation of all the phenomena of prices.

He furnishes a concise character of every season from 1688 to 1792
inclusive, from which it appears, that during that time good and bad
seasons occurred as it Edition: current; Page: [37] were in clusters,
thus producing ranges of high and low prices, which lasted not a few
years merely, but for considerable periods.

From 1686 to 1691, prices gradually declined, producing considerable
agricultural distress. But in 1692 began a series of seven very bad
seasons, which raised prices to an unusually high level. On the whole,
from 1692 to 1713 there were no fewer than twelve years of bad or
indifferent produce, and consequent high prices. From 1730 to 1739, on
the contrary, there was not one decidedly bad season. Accordingly wheat
was low. The winter of 1739-1740 was very severe; and the following
harvest was bad, which produced a considerable rise, but from 1741 to
1751, were ten abundant seasons. Again, from 1765 to 1776, bad seasons
frequently recurred, both in this country and on the continent. From
1776 to 1782, the seasons appear to have been favourable, because with
an increased and increasing population, the produce was sufficient for
the consumption.—From 1782 to 1792 inclusive, there was a large
proportion of severe winters and backward springs, and with the
exception of 1791, not one very abundant season. Now, it appears, that
during these 105 years, in all the periods when bad seasons were
comparatively frequent, Corn was permanently at a high price, and during
the periods when they were rare, it was uniformly low.

The analogy of this long period affords reason to conjecture that the
high and low prices from 1792 to 1822, may be attributed to similar
causes. This is what Mr. Tooke proceeds to establish by a minute
character of the seasons during the last thirty years. [Pp. 49-86.]4

The harvest of 1793 was barely an average, and that of 1794 was
deficient, which combined with unfavourable prospects for the following
year, raised prices very high; but the Government sent agents to buy
corn in the Baltic, and the harvest of 1795 turning out better than had
been expected, prices declined. They followed the variations of the
seasons until 1799, when two very bad harvests raised them to an
enormous height. On the whole, from 1793 to 1800 inclusive, there were
four very bad, and only two good crops, with four very severe winters,
producing increased consumption. This surely accounts for a permanence
of high prices during all this period.

Three tolerable harvests, with a small importation, lowered prices, and
produced agricultural distress. But the six seasons from 1807 to 1812
were all deficient, at a time when the difficulties of importation were
very great. On a general review of the whole period of twenty years from
1793 to 1812, there were eleven more or less deficient, six of average
produce, and three only of abundant crops. Surely it does not require
the supposition of an extra war demand, or a depreciation of the
currency beyond the difference between paper and gold, to account for
high prices during these 20 years.

Edition: current; Page: [38]
If prices had risen only in proportion to the deficiency of produce,
then the farmer and the landlord, while they would have suffered as
consumers, would not have gained as agriculturists by the rise. But when
the necessaries of life are concerned, prices always rise more than in
proportion to the deficiency. The Agricultural classes, therefore,
gained by the high prices, and concluding their gains to be permanent,
they applied much new capital to the land, thereby increasing the
quantity of produce, and aggravating their distress when low prices
returned.

Of the nine seasons, from 1813 to 1821 inclusive, one only, that of
1816, was bad, while three were very abundant, and five of fair average
produce. Comparing these with the nine years preceding, the difference
of produce is abundantly sufficient to account for a great difference of
price. As, when the produce was scanty, the price rose; so, when it was
abundant, the price fell in a greater proportion than was indicated by
the variation in the amount of produce. The Agriculturists, who before
gained, now lost by the state of prices. There can, therefore, be no
difficulty in accounting for the prosperity of Agriculture during the
first twenty years, and for its depression during the last ten of the
period from 1792 to 1822, from the vicissitudes of the seasons.

It may be objected that the lowest prices sometimes coincide with the
smallest stock for sale, and the highest prices with the largest stocks.
This may occasionally happen, but Mr. T. has shewn that it is perfectly
reconcilable with the principles which he has laid down. [Pt. III, pp.
87-112; Pt. IV, pp. 4-10.] Demand and supply, as affecting prices, are
either actual or prospective. If the supply on hand has been
under-rated, more especially if one or more seasons of increased supply
should follow, they who have bought before the fall of price, find that
they would have done better to postpone their demand, and fearing a
still greater fall, they think it their interest not to buy more than
they can help in advance.

Thus [says Mr. T.] although the supply may, in consequence of long
protracted discouragement, be falling off, that part of the demand which
consists in the anticipation of future want, falls off in a still
greater degree, till both reach their minimum; the consumption all the
time going on at its wonted rate, or more probably increasing in
consequence of cheapness; and in such cases it may be only when the
stock is at length discovered to be below the immediate want for actual
consumption, while fresh supplies are remote or uncertain, that any
decided improvement takes place.

(Part IV, pp. 8-9.)

In general, Mr. Tooke remarks, that after a glut has been once fully
established, it cannot be carried off without a “period of falling
prices and diminishing supplies, till it may so happen, though perhaps
rarely, that the lowest prices and the smallest stocks may coincide.”
(P. 9.)

Mr. Tooke subjoins a table of the prices of various commodities, from
1782 to 1822, with explanations, from which it appears that the
difference in the relative proportions of supply and demand is quite
sufficient to account for the Edition: current; Page: [39] fluctuations
in price. [Appendix No. 1 to Pt. IV, pp. 1-69.] Mr. T. has thus the
merit of having solved a number of the phenomena of prices, which
Gentlemen both in and out of Parliament have frequently quoted, to prove
the fallaciousness of the doctrines of political economy. Mr. T. has
shewn, that far from being inconsistent with those doctrines, they
afford still farther illustrations and confirmations of them, and could
not be explained upon any principles except those which they are brought
to impugn. It becomes no one, but least of all the Agriculturists, who
have suffered so recently from their ignorance of Political Economy, to
affect contempt for that important science. Had these gentlemen, in the
days of their prosperity, been aware that a succession of deficient
harvests was the only cause of the high prices, they would have foreseen
that a revulsion would finally take place; and they would neither have
expended upon the land a quantity of capital which is now irrecoverably
gone, nor entered into contracts, and made provisions for their younger
children, on the supposition that their rents would always continue at
the existing elevation.


13.: ERRORS OF THE SPANISH GOVERNMENT
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 12 AUG., 1823, PP. 2-3

This letter was occasioned by the results of the invasion of Spain by
France in April 1823, in support of Ferdinand VII (1784-1833). Having
been briefly on the throne in 1808, he ruled again from 1814 until he
was captured and held prisoner by the revolutionaries of 1820. Attempts
at constitutional government from 1820 to 1823 produced meagre results,
all of which, as Mill predicts, were erased when Ferdinand was released
by the Cortes in October, and took vengeance on the constitutionalists.
Headed as title, subheaded “To the Editor of the Morning Chronicle,” the
item is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A letter on the errors of
the Spanish Government in the Chronicle of 12th August 1823, signed M”

(MacMinn, p. 2).

sir,—

The conduct by which the Spanish Government have brought their affairs
to so dangerous a crisis, will afford a salutary lesson both to
themselves, if they should ultimately succeed in weathering the storm,
and to all who may hereafter throw off the shackles of despotism, and
establish a Constitutional Government. It will prove to them the danger
of trusting to historical evidence, that is, to the narrow and
precipitate theories of unenlightened historians, in preference to those
general principles of human nature, of which any one may convince
himself by his personal experience, unless he looks at human actions and
motives through the coloured medium of prejudice.

They whose interest compels them to oppose improvement, and they who, in
the emphatic language of Sir J. Mackintosh, “entangled by the habits of
detail in which they have been reared, possess not that erect and
intrepid spirit, those enlarged and original views, which adapt
themselves to new combinations of Edition: current; Page: [40]
circumstances, and sway in the great convulsions of human affairs:”*
these two classes of individuals are constantly holding up practice in
opposition to theory, and descanting on the necessity of following the
dictates of experience.—They know not what they say. They think they are
combatting theories by experience, while in fact they are combatting
good theories by bad ones.

Experience, the most certain and the most extensive which we have,
proves to us, that unless securities are provided, men will neglect the
public interest, whenever it interferes with their own. The same
experience enables us to determine what motives will be sufficient to
counteract this propensity. On this experience we build a theory of
government. Such a theory is least of all entitled to the epithet so
liberally applied to it of Utopianism. A Utopian theory is one which is
founded not upon our experience of mankind, but upon something
inconsistent with experience—upon the supposition that by some wondrous
scheme of education which is to be established, men may be induced to
act with a view to the public interest, even when it is inconsistent
with their own. The real Utopians are they who recommend to vest all
power in the hands of Kings and Aristocracies—to annihilate all
securities for their acting conformably to the public good,1 in order to
have the satisfaction of seeing them, through patriotism and pure
benevolence, sacrifice their dearest interests to the promotion of human
welfare.

Against theories founded upon universal experience, the enemies of
improvement hold out—what? Theories founded upon history; that is, upon
partial and incomplete experience. Has a measure, in any age or nation,
appeared to be followed by good effects? they think no farther
justification required for adopting it. Has another measure (however
conformable to sound and enlarged experience) had the misfortune to be
adopted by a nation, the affairs of which, afterwards, took a bad turn?
they make no allowance for altered circumstances, but precipitately and
peremptorily reject it.

These observations are intended to illustrate the conduct of the Spanish
Government since the revolution of 1820, particularly of the Ministry of
Count Toreno, and that of Martinez de la Rosa.2 Terrified at the result
of the French Edition: current; Page: [41] Revolution, they trembled at
every measure which could be made a handle by their opponents for
accusing them of violence; as if they could believe, that either the
wishes or the designs of those whom they had deprived of their
mischievous power, could for a moment be affected by the extension of
mercy to a few malefactors, or the silencing of a few Republican Orators
in the Fontana d’Oro at Madrid!3

Yet these pusillanimous statesmen, as if they did not already stand
committed in the eyes of their former masters, by accepting power under
a Revolutionary Government, still appear to have cherished the hope of
securing their own persons and property, if despotism should ever be
restored. They had heard that the Jacobin Clubs occasioned the excesses
of the French Revolution—and in a spirit of compromise, unworthy of the
Ministers of a regenerated country, they stopped that freedom of public
discussion, which, in a country where the circulation of books is so
limited, was the only available means of enlisting a body of public
opinion in their behalf.4 Their eyes were opened too late by the
conspiracy of the 7th of July;5 and a few months before the moment when
they were to feel the want of that popular opinion which timely vigour
would have roused, the Ministry of San Miguel re-established the
Patriotic Societies.6

It was in the same compromising spirit, and from the same irrational
dread of imitating the French, that the ruffian Elio was for three years
suffered to disgrace by his existence that country which had streamed
with the blood of his fellow-citizens slaughtered by his command.7 This
wretch, as much superior in guilt to an assassin as the murder of
hundreds is more atrocious than that of one individual—at length, in
September, 1822, received the just reward of his Edition: current; Page:
[42] crimes. But who can blame a delay of punishment, when the
perpetrators of the massacre at Cadiz8 still glory in their atrocious
deeds? Had these been visited by the hand of justice, the Spanish
Patriots might not now have seen in arms against them so many
adventurers, whom experience has taught, that the greatest atrocities
may be committed without dread of punishment.

In fact, the idea of a bloodless Revolution is, when rightly considered,
visionary and absurd. All great Reforms must injure many private
interests, and cannot, therefore, fail to raise many enemies. Nor can
those enemies be safely permitted to mature their machinations in
security. We do not mean that the people should be excited to massacre.
We are not the apologists of the 2d of September, 1792; but, whenever
treason against the Constitution can be clearly brought home to any
individual, to spare that individual is not mercy but weakness. It
cannot alter the hostility of the despots, while it increases their
power by evincing an ill-timed indecision. The Spanish Government must
now bitterly regret that dread of the accusation of shedding blood,
which prevented them from bringing the Duke del Infantado to condign
punishment for his notorious complicity in the treason of the 7th of
July.9 Enough has been done to exasperate, but nothing to weaken; and if
San Miguel and his colleagues should eventually fall into the hands of
the traitor whom they so injudiciously spared, they will scarce have the
folly to expect, that he will forget from whose hands he received his
degradation and banishment, and remember only that those hands left him
life, after taking all, which, to a mind habituated like his, to
mischievous power, could render that life an object of desire.

M.


14.: THE MISCHIEVOUSNESS OF AN OATH
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 15 AUG., 1823, P. 3

Mill here continues the argument of “Judicial Oaths” (No. 11), to which
he refers in the opening sentence, by citing a case reported in the
Police News of the Morning Chronicle, 14 Aug., 1823, p. 4. The letter,
headed “To the Editor of the Morning Chronicle,” is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A short letter signed A Lover of Caution pointing out a
case of the mischievousness of an oath in the Chronicle of 15th August
1823” (MacMinn, p. 2). As is evident in the text, the letter is actually
signed “A Friend to Caution.”

Edition: current; Page: [43]
sir,—

In a Letter signed “No Lawyer,” which you inserted in your Paper of the
23d July, among the many ill effects of the ceremony of an oath,
considerable stress was laid upon the false estimate which it occasions
of the credibility of witnesses. When they speak the truth, it is not
because they have sworn (for if that were the reason Custom House and
University oaths would be observed), but because they fear the shame and
the penalties of perjury.1 It is, however, too commonly believed, that
if a man has sworn, no other security is required.

An instance of this appeared in your Paper of August 14. A gentleman who
complained of a fraud practised on him at a mock auction in Lime-street,
stated that he had neglected to make himself acquainted with the name of
the auctioneer, because he presumed, that all auctioneers being sworn,
were therefore respectable.2 Yet it must appear to all unprejudiced
minds, that if the other circumstances were insufficient to remove the
possibility of suspicion, the circumstance of the oath added nothing to
the security. If there were motives sufficient for fraud, they were
sufficient for fraud and perjury both.

A Friend To Caution


15.: BLESSINGS OF EQUAL JUSTICE
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 20 AUG., 1823, P. 2

This letter was prompted by the reports (Morning Chronicle, 15 Aug.,
1823, p. 4; “Police; Queen Square,” The Times, 11 and 15 Aug., 1823,
both p. 3; “Police: Queen-Square,” Examiner, 17 Aug., 1823, p. 543) of
the handling by Mr. White, the magistrate, of a complaint on 10 Aug. by
Mrs. Lang (alias Miss Drummond), a servant of Lady Caroline Lamb
(1785-1828), that had been rebutted by her husband, William Lamb
(1779-1848), later Lord Melbourne. The letter, headed as title and
subheaded “To the Editor of the Morning Chronicle,” is described in
Mill’s bibliography as “A letter on publicity in judicature, and its
infraction by a Queen Square magistrate, in the Chronicle of 20 August
1823”

(MacMinn, p. 3).

sir,—

Among the numberless blessings which we are continually told that we owe
to our glorious Constitution, a good administration of justice has
always been considered as the most valuable. While the judicature of
every other nation is corrupt, profligate and oppressive—a ready tool in
the hands of power; it has been our boast that ours alone is pure and
undefiled; that it gives ear alike to the rich and to the poor, that
neither the interests nor the prejudices of rank and station ever divert
our Judges from the straight path of equity and impartiality.

A practical illustration of this inestimable blessing occurred some days
since at the Queen-square Police-office; and although several papers,
and you, Sir, Edition: current; Page: [44] among the rest, have taken up
the subject, far too little stress has, in my opinion, been laid upon
it.

A servant of a lady of rank presented herself at the office, to complain
of ill-treatment received from her Ladyship. Her statement appeared in
the papers. A day or two after the husband of the lady appeared, and
denied the story told by the servant.1 So far both parties stood upon
the same ground. On one side was the woman’s affirmation; on the other,
that of her master. The woman’s story was probably false: that is not
the question. It is not sufficient that it should be presumed to be
false; there ought to be evidence, and conclusive evidence of its
falsehood, before a Magistrate, who sits to act as a Judge, should take
upon himself to reject her application. Observe now the conduct of Mr.
White: not only does he without farther inquiry pronounce in favour of
the gentleman, upon his own affirmation only; he does more—because the
newspapers inserted the woman’s story, being equally ready to insert
that of her master, he declares that reporters shall be no longer
admitted into Court.

That defect of publicity should occasion defect of evidence against
criminals, by preventing many persons from hearing of the trial, who
would otherwise have come forward as witnesses, is the least of the
mischiefs which will arise out of this precedent. The impunity which it
will secure to a corrupt Judge, is the greatest.

Although it is the prevailing cry of the English Aristocracy that the
Judges are immaculate, and although a deluded people have too long given
them credit for any quantity of virtue which they think fit to claim,
the public now at length begin to learn that it is absurd to expect from
men the qualities of angels. To make a man a Judge, does not change his
nature. Judges, like other men, will always prefer themselves to their
neighbours. Judges, like other men, will indulge their indolence and
satiate their rapacity whenever they can do it without fear of
detection. The judicial office offers not fewer, but more numerous, and
far more immediate temptations, than one who is not a Judge can easily
be subject to. Allow any man to profit by injustice, and it is not the
name of Judge which will shield the people from his oppression. When we
see how soon almost any virtue yields to continued temptation, there
needs little to persuade us, that if every Magistrate were to follow the
example of Mr. White, and administer justice with closed doors,
Magistrates would ere long be again what they were in the time of
Fielding and of Smollett2—leagued with every thief in London.

Edition: current; Page: [45]
To illustrate the tendency of the precedent, I will put a case; and it
is one which might easily have occurred. — Suppose that the woman’s
story had been correct, and that of her master false; it will not be
denied that there are masters who would not scruple to tell a lie, if
they knew that, as in this case, their simple affirmation would put an
end to the dispute. But it is only a rich man, it is only a member of
the aristocracy, whose word is to be taken as conclusive evidence in his
own cause. Thus then, whenever a rich individual and a poor one
contradict each other on a matter of fact, the poor man is to be
disbelieved, and the rich man suffered to carry off (perhaps) the wages
of mendacity. And, to crown all, this iniquity is to be covered with the
veil of secrecy. Then, perhaps, other motives than aristocratic
sympathies may mix themselves in the decision of causes; again, perhaps,
we may see a judicial controversy transformed into a competition between
the purses of the parties, which can best satisfy the rapacity of the
Judge.

Mr. White may derive a precedent, though not an excuse, for the
violation of almost the only security we have for the purity of
judicature, from the example which has been set by higher authorities,
of prohibiting the publication of trials, until the whole of the
evidence shall have been given,* for the benevolent purpose, forsooth,
of preventing ex parte statements from going forth to the world, and
giving a false impression of the state of the case. I am not aware that
it is a recognised maxim of jurisprudence, however frequently it may be
acted upon in practice, that occasional and partial evil shall
preponderate over universal good. There might be some reason indeed, for
preventing ex parte statements from going forth, if the Judges could
invent any method of hearing both parties at once. Until, however, some
such method shall have been discovered, I shall continue to think that
if Juries, who are taken from among the public, can hear first one
party, and then the other, and yet decide justly, there cannot be much
danger in presenting the evidence to the public, in precisely the same
order as it comes before the Jury.

A Judge must always have much to gain by injustice: and if due
securities are not provided, he will do injustice. The only efficient
security which our Constitution provides is publicity: it is the
disgrace which a Judge incurs by an unjust decision. This disgrace is
greater or less, according as the public attention Edition: current;
Page: [46] is more or less drawn to the case. Now it is well known that
after a cause is decided, the interest taken in it to a great degree
subsides. The prohibition of ex parte statements is, therefore, a
contrivance to avert the public attention from abuses of judicial
authority: to protect the Judges from that odium which their conduct may
deserve.† Encouraged by the success of this indirect attack upon the
only security for good judicature, Mr. White, more boldly, has cut the
Gordian knot, and destroyed that security altogether.

This is not, however, an affair to be passed over in silence. The
securities against abuse, which, in the present state of our Government,
we possess, are not so numerous that we can afford to lose one, and that
one the most important of them. He is not a lover of good judicature, or
he is a very blind one, who does not cry shame upon Mr. White, for
setting a precedent so destructive of all security for justice; that if
he himself were deliberately planning the most flagrant abuses of power,
he could not have hit upon an expedient better calculated to serve his
purpose.

A Lover of Justice

N.B. Since writing the above, I have had the pleasure to learn that
Reporters still continue to attend the Office, notwithstanding the
injunction of Mr. White.


16.: PERSECUTION FOR RELIGIOUS SCRUPLES
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 26 AUG., 1823, P. 3

Mill’s third discussion of oaths (see esp. No. 6), this letter was
occasioned by “Imposition of a Fine for Refusing to Take a Judicial
Oath,” Morning Chronicle, 22 Aug., 1823, p. 4. It reported the fining on
16 Aug. of Connell, a pawnbroker, by Richard Pennefather (1773-1859),
K.C., Chief Baron of the Irish Court of Exchequer, in the Cork City
Criminal Court on 16 Aug., 1823. Headed as title and subheaded “To the
Editor of the Morning Chronicle,” the item is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A letter on the conduct of an Irish judge in fining a
witness for refusing to take an oath, in the Chronicle of 26th August
1823, signed the Censor of the Judges”

(MacMinn, p. 3).

sir,—

I observed in your Paper of Friday last, a conspicuous instance of the
mischiefs of judicial oaths. These mischiefs you have frequently
adverted to, but I question whether so glaring an instance of them ever
yet presented itself to your notice.

A man was called to give evidence at a Court of Justice in Ireland on a
cause of no extraordinary interest. He declined taking an oath on the
ground of religious scruples: upon which Mr. Baron Pennyfather fined him
100l.

Edition: current; Page: [47]
Either this man was conscientiously averse to taking an oath, or he
wished, under that pretext, to evade the necessity of giving testimony.

On the former supposition, every discerning lover of justice must lament
that, by the imposition of a ceremony which (as we see in the case of
Custom-house and University oaths)1 adds no security whatever, the
testimony of a highly conscientious witness should have been excluded.

This supposition appears the most probable, as persons appeared to
certify that the witness was known to have these scruples. But even if
he really wished, under this pretence, to frustrate the ends of justice,
the consequence is not less deplorable. If he had avowed his
determination not to give evidence, he would have incurred the infamy
which so pernicious a resolution deserves. By covering the wickedness of
his intention under the cloak of religion, he screened himself from well
merited disgrace.

If there were nothing more, therefore, than the exclusion of his
evidence, this were surely enough: but when to the exclusion we add the
fine, it ought to inspire every man with serious reflections. It will
stand upon record that in the nineteenth century, a fine of 100l. was
imposed upon a man because his religious opinions differed from those of
Mr. Baron Pennyfather. I blame not the Judge, but the law, for excluding
the witness. The glory, however, of the fine, belongs wholly to the
Judge, who, instead of labouring to effect the amendment of a law which
excludes the conscientious while it lets in the unprincipled witness,
took upon himself to imitate the Court of Ecclesiastical Commission, and
punish Heresy with a fine of 100l.2

The lawyers may quibble—they may say that he was fined, not for heresy,
but for contempt of Court. Contempt of Court is a mere cant phrase, and,
in most instances, a phrase employed for the worst of purposes. On this
principle, the Judges under Charles II might be justified, who
repeatedly fined the Jury because they would not condemn those whom it
suited the “Court” and their employers to oppress.3 All the quirks with
which the English law, more than any other, abounds, will not alter the
fact, that a man has been fined one hundred pounds for his religious
scruples; not for refusing to give evidence—he did not refuse this. He
never hesitated to give a solemn affirmation of all which he knew; he
scrupled only the oath. The Judge had not power to dispense with the
ceremony, but he was under no obligation to impose on a pawnbroker, not
likely to be in very Edition: current; Page: [48] opulent circumstances,
a fine which may amount to the ruin of all his prospects in life.

When I consider that the class to whom Mr. Baron Pennyfather belongs,
are continually holding up the importance of encouraging the spirit of
religion among the people, continually lamenting the little influence
which religious motives exert over human conduct, I cannot help thinking
that they should be the last to impose a ruinous fine upon a man on
account of the peculiar strength of his religious principles, and thus
hold out encouragement to the disregard of those principles.

In discussing this subject, I have avoided considering the question
whether oaths are or are not consistent with Christianity—for even
supposing the witness to have been in error, a man is not to be fined
100l. for being in error.

The administration of justice in Ireland has so long been a scene of all
which is unjust and oppressive, that an occurrence, which, if performed
at our doors, would have excited attention, may, perhaps, be passed
over, when happening amid so many others still more atrocious than
itself. But the law is the same in England as in Ireland. In both
countries the lawyers are equally ignorant and equally prejudiced; and
what has happened in the County of Cork, may, ere long, perhaps, be
imitated in that of Middlesex.

The Censor of the Judges


17.: RESURRECTION-MEN
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 1 SEPT. 1823, P. 2

This letter was prompted by “Disturbers of the Dead,” Morning Chronicle,
25 Aug., 1823, p. 4, which reported the trial and sentence of Cornelius
Bryant and William Millard for opening a grave in the burial ground of
the London Hospital. Those who, by disinterment or other means, procured
corpses for sale to schools of anatomy, were known as
“resurrection-men.” Dissection of non-criminal corpses was an offence
under common and ecclesiastical law; under 32 Henry VIII, c. 42 (1540),
Sect. 2, four executed felons could be dissected each year; under 25
George II, c. 37 (1752), all executed murderers were to be “dissected
and anatomized.” Mill may have known that Jeremy Bentham had made
provision in his will that his body be used for medical purposes, as
Mill recommends in the letter. The letter, headed as title, subheaded
“To the Editor of the Morning Chronicle,” is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A letter on the punishment of body-stealers, in the
Chronicle of 1st September 1823, signed a Friend to Science”

(MacMinn, p. 3).

sir,—

In your Paper of Monday last, I observed one among a great number of
recent cases, where the description of persons called resurrection-men
had been sacrificed to popular prejudice.

If it be admitted, and I do not see how it can be called in question,
that a knowledge of medicine and surgery cannot be acquired without an
acquaintance Edition: current; Page: [49] with the phenomena which the
human organs present, both in health and in disease; if it be allowed,
that, in order to become acquainted with these phenomena, it is
necessary to have ocular demonstration of them, and that dissection is
the only mode in which ocular demonstration can be had; it is obvious
that every thing which tends to prevent subjects from being obtained in
sufficient quantity for the purposes of anatomy, must tend materially to
diminish the facilities of acquiring medical and surgical knowledge, and
to throw back those sciences into their pristine barbarism.

If bodies had never been dissected, sentimentalists could not have
appealed to our hearts in behalf of the sanctity of the tomb, for
whether we have or have not such an organ, would probably to this day
have remained a problem.

We should have been equally ignorant that we have a brain, lungs, a
stomach, nerves, a venous and arterial system, &c. At all events, the
structure and position of those organs must have remained for ever
unknown to us. The internal processes of animal life—respiration,
digestion, the circulation of the blood, all the various secretions,
must have continued among the arcana of nature, and all internal
diseases must, from want of the requisite knowledge, have been
incurable. A man feels, for instance, an acute pain, and shows symptoms
of general ill health, from an obstruction in his liver; how can the
surgeon, who has never seen a dissection, discover where the remedy is
to be applied? The utmost which he could infer would be that the source
of evil is somewhere on the right side; and even of this he could not be
assured, for the seat of a disease is frequently at a considerable
distance from the place of its external manifestation. He might
endeavour to cure a liver complaint by a remedy calculated to act on the
urinary glands; or to remove the rheumatism by means of an emetic.

If dissection had never taken place, the art of medicine could scarcely
have existed. And if it were now to cease, the evil would not be
confined to preventing it from ever improving. If, indeed, the present
race of practitioners were immortal, this might be the utmost limit of
the evil. But there is another generation rising up, who must receive
equal instruction with their predecessors, if it is expected that they
shall be equally skilful. If dissection were to cease, the death of the
latest survivor among the practitioners now living, would be the date of
the extinction of medical skill in the world. Instead of ascertaining by
actual examination the structure and positions of the organs, physicians
would be reduced to guess at them from the imperfect accounts left to
them by their predecessors, and the grossest errors would continually be
committed.

That bodies should be dissected, is, therefore, absolutely necessary;
and the only question is in what way the interests of science and the
feelings of individuals may best be conciliated? For any one to attempt
confining dissectors to the dead bodies of criminals, displays a degree
of ignorance on the subject, which renders it presumption in a person so
ill qualified to give an opinion at all on it. Every Middlesex and Old
Bailey Sessions produce perhaps two, perhaps Edition: current; Page:
[50] three, executions. Is it expected that these shall supply bodies
for all the dissections which are necessary to make the rising
generation of medical students acquainted with the structure of the
human body?

Subjects must, therefore, be provided, and if so, that way is the best
which is least offensive to the relatives of the deceased. It implies,
indeed, considerable weakness of mind to transfer the associations of
pain, which are connected with wounding a living body, to the cold and
insensible organs of the dead; as if to be dissected were more shocking
than to be eaten by worms! If an attempt were made to dissect a living
human creature, there would then be some cause for raising an outcry. It
could scarcely then be louder or more widely propagated than it is. But
since the feeling exists, the best mode of obtaining subjects is
undoubtedly through the resurrection-men. There is nothing here to hurt
the feelings of any one. No one knows that the body of his friend or
relative has been taken. He cannot acquire this disagreeable piece of
information unless he takes considerable trouble for that purpose. Yet
these men, who pursue an occupation so useful to the interests of
science, and which can give pain to no one unless by his own fault, are
condemned to that place of torments incalculable, the tread mill!

What they would not be were it not for the popular prejudice, that
prejudice itself compels them to become. A man who will brave such a
mass of odium, a man who will expose himself to be stoned to death by
the rabble, cannot have much character to lose. Subjects must be had,
and as long as there is a demand for medical-surgical knowledge, they
will be had, no matter at what cost. Body-stealing cannot, therefore, be
prevented, but the price of subjects may be raised, and while the
expence of a medical education is enhanced, temptation is held out to
persons in distress to expose themselves to such a degree of odium, as
cannot be increased by the most vicious conduct on their part, and which
by a natural consequence removes all the inducement to a moral and
virtuous life. Hence, if the resurrection-men are for the most part low
and vicious characters, it is the absurd prejudice, and that alone,
which ought to be blamed.

To conclude, I earnestly recommend, as the only effectual mode of
destroying the prejudice, that such as are superior to it adopt the
practice of leaving their own bodies to the surgeons. If men known to
the world for their exalted qualities would do this the prejudice might
in time be removed. Such provisions by will have occasionally been made,
but from their rarity they are still considered as eccentricities. When
they become more common they may perhaps be recognised as proceeding
from no other eccentricity than that which is implied in being exempt
from, and in wishing to annihilate one of the most vulgar of all
prejudices.

A Friend to Science

Edition: current; Page: [51]


18.: MALTHUS’S MEASURE OF VALUE
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 5 SEPT., 1823, P. 2

Thomas Robert Malthus (1766-1834) was a political economist whose views,
especially on population, were often discussed by Mill. This lengthy
review is headed “The Measure of Value Stated and Illustrated, with an
Application of It to the Alterations in the Value of the English
Currency since 1790, by the Rev. T.R. Malthus, M.A. F.R.S. [London:]
Murray, 1823.” It is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A review of
Mr. Malthus’s pamphlet on the ‘Measure of Value’ which appeared in the
Chronicle of 5th September 1823”

(MacMinn, p. 3).

when two commodities vary in their relative value, it is often necessary
to obtain information of two things. First, the extent of the
variation—this may easily be determined, without calling in the
assistance of a third commodity. So far, therefore, there is no need of
a measure. But it may also be desirable to know whether the cause of the
variation is in the one article or in the other, or if in both, to what
degree it is in each. And here it is, that a Measure of Value is chiefly
useful.

If a commodity can be found exempt from the influence of all causes of
variation, such a commodity may safely be taken as a measure. If any
article varies in value with respect to it, we shall know that the cause
of variation cannot be in the measure, and must, therefore, be wholly in
the other commodity.

The received opinion, however, is, that no such commodity is to be
found, every article being subject, not only to temporary, but also to
permanent causes of variation.

Mr. Malthus is of a different opinion; we shall proceed to give an
outline of his argument.

Commodities, he says, will not be produced, unless their value is
sufficient to pay the wages, profits, and rents, necessary to their
production. Rent, however, is paid only for a certain class of
commodities, and of these, the value is regulated by that part of the
produce which is almost exclusively resolvable into wages and profits,
and pays very little rent.

The natural value, therefore, of commodities, is composed of labour and
profits.

If labour were the only requisite to production, and if the interval
between the exertion of the labour and its remuneration in the completed
commodity were inconsiderable, commodities would, on an average,
exchange with each other according to the quantity of labour employed in
producing them. [Pp. 3-6.]

But two circumstances, he says, render this rule inaccurate, in all
cases different from that which we just supposed.

1. A considerable interval must elapse between the exertion of some
sorts of labour, and the completion of the article on which they are
employed. If A and B Edition: current; Page: [52] are two commodities
produced by equal labour, but requiring different intervals of time; the
values of the two commodities must be different in order to yield the
same rate of profits.

2. Capital being accumulated labour, it follows that when fixed capital
comes to be employed, the immediate labour expended on a commodity,
together with the wear and tear which the fixed capital has undergone in
its production, may be considered as the amount of labour expended on
the commodity. Suppose this amount to be the same for two articles, yet
as the profits must be charged upon the whole capital, whether all
consumed in the production or not, it follows, that if the amount of
fixed capital is unequal for the two commodities, the values must also
be different, as there are unequal amounts of profit to pay. [Pp. 8-12.]

Having for these reasons set aside the doctrine, that the values of
commodities depend upon the quantities of labour expended in producing
them, Mr. Malthus proceeds to state what he considers as the correct
expression. Value, he says, depends upon labour and profits. [P. 14.]
Two commodities exchange for one another, although the one is produced
by less labour than the other, provided the deficiency of labour is
compensated by the greater amount of profits.

If this be true, it follows that whatever is capable of measuring labour
and profits, is fitted to be an accurate measure of value. Such a
measure Mr. Malthus thinks he has found in the quantity of labour which
a commodity will purchase in the market. This, he says, is equal to the
quantity of labour expended in its production, together with the
ordinary profits. This, therefore, is an accurate measure of value. [Pp.
15-16.]

Such is the outline of Mr. Malthus’s argument. The remainder of his work
consists of illustrations and applications.

For duly appreciating the merits of this doctrine, it is necessary to
have clear conceptions with regard to the nature of profits. Under
ordinary circumstances, the labourer and the capitalist being the only
persons whose services are requisite for the production of commodities,
they alone can have any claim upon the commodities when produced. The
joint produce of labour and capital is therefore divided between the
labourer and the capitalist, between wages and profits. The whole,
indeed, of the produce usually appears to belong to the capitalist; but
this is only because he has purchased the labourer’s share. Whatever is
paid to the labourer, to obtain his co-operation in the work of
production, is to be considered as the labourer’s share of the produce,
paid however in advance. What remains is the share of the capitalist,
usually called his profits.

After this preliminary explanation we must readily assent to the first
position of Mr. Malthus, that value is composed of labour and profits,
since, if we may trust his own explanation, he only means that the
produce, or what amounts to the same thing, its value, composes wages
and profits; in other words, that it is divided between the labourer and
the capitalist. Thus understood, the position is self-evident, and has
never been disputed by any political economist.

Edition: current; Page: [53]
We cannot so readily admit the second position, that value depends upon
labour and profits. The opinion now generally received among political
economists is that value depends upon the quantity of labour expended in
production. To this expression Mr. Malthus objects, because it does not
include a particular fact, namely, the difference of values, which is
occasioned by difference in the quickness of the returns, or in the
proportion of fixed capital.

The fact itself is indisputable; nor is it less certain, that the
expression does not include it. But it may be annexed as a modification;
and such must be its fate, unless some expression shall be devised,
which shall include this and all other facts, without being liable to
any other objection.

Tried by this test, Mr. Malthus’s expression appears to us
objectionable. It expresses much more than is intended.

When we say that value depends upon labour, we mean, that according as
the quantity of labour expended in producing a commodity is increased or
diminished, ceteris paribus, its value rises or falls. In like manner,
if we say that value depends, wholly or partially, upon profits, it is
implied, that when profits rise values shall rise; when profits fall,
values shall fall. But if profits rise or fall, the variation must be,
not in some particular profits, but in all profits. This is universally
acknowledged. Mr. Malthus’s expression therefore implies, that a rise or
fall of profits raises or lowers all values; which is impossible: for
values are relative, and the rise of some values imports the fall of
others.

Having thus shewn what Mr. M.’s expression really means, let us consider
what he intends it to mean; and let us remember that the sole basis of
his doctrine is a case of difference in values, arising from a
difference in profits. What is meant to be expressed therefore is, that
not absolute profits, but differences of profits, and these not in the
rate, but in the total amount of profits, as compared with the immediate
expenditure, have some influence on values. This is all which Mr.
Malthus’s fact can be made to prove; but this is no more than the fact
itself, and by no method of reasoning can the fact be made to prove any
thing more than itself. It is, therefore, totally inadequate to form the
basis of a new theory of value, and can only be admitted as a
modification of the old one. But, as a modification, it has been
universally received among political economists, and is much more fully
stated by Mr. Ricardo, the principal supporter of the old theory, than
by Mr. Malthus or any other opponent of that theory.1

For these reasons, Mr. M.’s second position appears to us unsupported by
sufficient proof. Other considerations, of equal strength, also present
themselves in opposition to it. To say that value depends upon profits,
seeing that profits are the capitalist’s share of the produce, is to say
that the value of the whole produce depends upon the proportion in which
it is divided between the labourer and the capitalist. This doctrine
would appear scarcely to merit a serious refutation.

Edition: current; Page: [54]
The doctrine concerning a measure of value, which Mr. Malthus builds
upon premises so unsound, it may appear unnecessary, after what has been
said, formally to refute. We cannot, however, refrain from offering a
few remarks on this part also of Mr. M.’s doctrine.

The measure of value, as proposed by Mr. Malthus, is the quantity of
labour which an article commands in the market; because, says he, this
includes the labour expended in production, together with ordinary
profits.

Mr. M. has indeed shewn, which is not difficult, that labour possesses
this property, but he has not shewn that it is peculiar to labour. It
would appear, that not labour merely, but cloth, and all other
commodities, are on a par in this respect. If the quantity of labour
which a commodity will purchase, includes the labour expended in
production, together with profits, the quantity of cloth which it will
purchase does the like, for, by the very supposition, it is of the same
value.

Mr. M. has anticipated this objection, and has provided the following
answer:

If the advances of capitalists consisted specifically in cloth, then
these advances would always have the effect required in production; and
as profits are calculated upon the advances necessary to production,
whatever they may be, the quantity of cloth advanced, with the addition
of the ordinary profits, estimated also in quantity of cloth, would
represent both the natural and relative value of the commodity. But the
specific advances of capitalists do not consist of cloth but of labour.

(P. 17.)

In point of fact, however, the advances of capitalists do not consist of
labour—they consist of wages; that is, of the food, clothing, and
lodging of the labourer, and if capital is called accumulated labour,
this only means, that it is the accumulated produce of labour. Any of
the necessaries of life must, therefore, if this argument be correct, be
equally fitted with labour to be a measure of value.

It is, however, really immaterial whether the advances are in one
commodity or in another. Whatever be the nature of the returns—be they
in Corn, in Cloth, or in any other commodity, they must always be such
as to repay the expences of production, together with the ordinary
profits of stock; or, to use Mr. M.’s expression, they must include
labour and profits. Labour, therefore, in this respect, possesses no
advantage over any other commodity.

If, indeed, Mr. M. could prove that no causes of variation can operate
upon labour, his position would be established without farther trouble.
But this, we apprehend, is impossible. There are two causes which
operate upon the value of labour; first, a variation in the relative
amount of population and capital; this tends to alter the real reward of
the labourer; and 2dly, a variation in the cost of producing the
articles consumed by the labourer; this tends to change its value. So
long as labour shall be subject to the influence of these causes, so
long will it be liable to variations, and therefore equally unfit with
almost any commodity to be an accurate measure of value.

Mr. M. admits that the labourer receives, at different times, very
different Edition: current; Page: [55] quantities of produce; but this
variable amount of produce, he affirms to be constant in value; an
assertion, at least in appearance, contradictory to all our experience.
In support of this allegation, he argues as follows. The reward of the
labourer has been itself produced by labour, and its value, therefore,
is resolvable into labour and profits. But if the quantity of labour
employed in producing it be increased, profits must fall; if it be
diminished, profits must rise, and so as to leave the sum absolutely
constant. The value of wages, therefore, is constant. [Pp. 26-8.]

The remark which obviously suggests itself is that, like some of the
former arguments, so also this, if it proves any thing, proves too much.
There is no reason here given why labour, rather than any other
commodity, should be the measure. If it be true of the produce, which is
the labourer’s reward, that its value is composed of labour and profits,
it must, we apprehend, be equally true of all other commodities. It may
with equal justice be argued, that any amount, constant or variable, of
corn, of cloth, or of iron, is always of the same value.

For if the quantity of labour employed in producing it be increased, so
that a greater share of the completed commodity must go to wages, there
obviously remains a smaller share for profits. Does this prove that the
value of the commodity is constant? Certainly not: for value does not
depend upon the proportion in which the produce is divided between the
labourer and the capitalist; it depends upon the demand and supply of
the market, regulated and limited by cost of production.

The whole chain of reasoning depends upon this position, that the value
of the labourer’s reward resolves itself into labour and profits. Wages,
we have seen to be, that share of the produce which is allotted to the
labourer, purchased, however, beforehand by the capitalist. What,
therefore, is true of the labourer’s share, when purchased by the
capitalist, would also be true of it, if the commodity were actually
divided between them. Let us make this supposition. The value of the
labourer’s share cannot then be said to be made up of labour and
profits, since profits do not enter into it, being wholly on the side of
the capitalist. Suppose now the labour necessary for producing the
commodity to increase, the value of the labourer’s share can no longer
remain constant, since the increase of labour cannot be balanced by a
fall of profits. But if the labourer’s share is not constant in value,
when he waits to receive it until the production is completed; neither
can it be constant, when he receives it beforehand in the shape of
wages.

Mr. Malthus, however, subjoins a numerical table, by which he thinks he
has proved the value of wages to be constant. This table he prefaces by
the following obscure paragraph:

If, instead of referring to commodities generally, we refer to the
variable quantity of produce which under different circumstances forms
the wages of a given number of labourers, we shall find that the
variable quantity of labour required to obtain this Edition: current;
Page: [56] produce, will always exactly agree with the proportion of the
whole produce which goes to labour; because, however variable may be the
amount of this produce, it will be divided into a number of parts equal
to the number of labourers which it will command; and as the first set
of labourers who produced these wages may be considered as having been
paid at the same rate as the second set, whose labour the produce
commands, it is obvious that if to obtain the produce which commands ten
labourers, 6, 7, 8, or 9 labourers be required, the proportion of the
produce which goes to labour, in these different cases, will be 6/10,
7/10, 8/10, or 9/10, leaving 4/10, 3/10, 2/10, or 1/10 for profits.

(Pp. 30-1.)

As far as the above paragraph has any meaning, it appears to be this:—If
the labour of six men is required to produce the wages of ten, what
remains for profits must be equal to the wages of four: if the labour of
seven men is required to produce the wages of ten, profits will be equal
to the wages of three; and so on. But this, one would imagine, scarcely
needs a long paragraph, and a table which fills a whole page to prove
it. Let us see, however, the inference which he builds upon it. If the
labour required to obtain the produce be increased, then, says he,
profits will fall, so as to leave the value of the whole produce
constant. Why is it constant? Because, if wages are 6/10ths, profits are
4/10ths: if wages are 7/10ths, profits are 3/10ths; if wages are
8/10ths, profits are 2/10ths; and so on. Now the sum of 6/10ths and
4/10ths, the sum of 7/10ths and 3/10ths, and the sum of 8/10ths and
2/10ths, are all equal. Equal to what? to 10/10ths. The value,
therefore, of the produce is constant, because it is always equal to
10/10ths of the produce, that is, to itself!

The same identical proposition, and nothing more, results from Mr.
Malthus’s redoubtable table, from which we extract part of several of
the columns. [P. 38.]

  ----------------- ------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------
  Rate of profits   Quantity of labour required to produce the wages of ten men   Quantity of profits on the advances of labour   Invariable value of the wages of a given number of men
  25 per cent.      8                                                             2                                               10
  15.38             8.66                                                          1.34                                            10
  50                6.6                                                           3.4                                             10
  16.66             8.6                                                           1.4                                             10
  27.2              7.85                                                          2.15                                            10
  ----------------- ------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------

From these elaborate computations he proves that the wages of ten men
are in value always equal to ten. To ten quarters of corn, or ten suits
of clothing? No.—To ten of what? This we shall see. The number 8 in the
second column represents a certain quantity of labour, the labour,
namely, of eight men; the number 2 in the next column represents the
labour of two men; the number 10, Edition: current; Page: [57]
therefore, which is obtained by adding the 8 and the 2, represents the
labour of ten men; and Mr. Malthus informs us that the wages of ten men
are invariable in value, because they are always equal in value to the
labour of ten men! In other words, the wages of a day’s labour are
always of the same value, because they are the wages of a day’s labour!

It is therefore evident that the whole of Mr. Malthus’s argument is a
begging of the question. His object is to prove that labour is an
accurate measure of value, because the value of wages is invariable. But
in order to prove this, he covertly assumes labour as the standard; and
then, of course, he can easily prove that the wages of ten men, as
compared with labour, are always of the same value, because they can
always purchase the labour of ten men. But although wages are invariable
in value with respect to labour, they are not invariable with respect to
commodities in general.

If Mr. Malthus had stated his premises and his conclusion, in the simple
form in which we have now stated them, no one could have been misled by
so palpable a petitio principii.—But many who can see through a fallacy,
in a concise and clear piece of argument, are not able to resist a long
succession of obscure paragraphs, and a numerical table of no less than
nine columns.

To us, therefore, Mr. M. appears to have entirely failed in proving that
labour, as a measure of value, is preferable to any other commodity.

The principle itself being erroneous, we shall give no more than a hasty
view of the applications.

“1. On the subject of rents,” says he, “such a standard would determine,
among other things, that as the increase in the value of corn is only
measured by a decrease in the corn wages of labour, such increase of
value is a very inconsiderable source of the increase of rents compared
with improvements in agriculture.” (P. 54.) It is difficult to trace the
connexion between the premises and the conclusion of this argument.
However, the whole must fall to the ground, as the premises themselves
are erroneous. There may be an increase in the value of corn, without
any decrease in corn wages. When corn rises permanently in exchangeable
value, the wages of labour almost uniformly rise along with it. The rise
of wages is indeed less than that of corn, but it bears a very
considerable proportion to it. The most important practical errors must
therefore be the consequence of estimating the rise in corn by a
comparison with labour, a commodity which always rises along with it.

“2. If tithes do not fall mainly on the labourer, the acknowledged
diminution in the corn rents of the landlord, occasioned by tithes,
cannot be balanced by an increase of their value, and consequently
tithes must fall mainly on the landlord.” (Pp. 54-5.)—Another most
important practical mistake. Corn rents, indeed, are diminished by
tithes. But if the exchangeable value of corn is raised, the landlord is
indemnified. And although corn may not rise as compared with labour—and
therefore, by Mr. Malthus, may be said not to have risen at Edition:
current; Page: [58] all—there can be no doubt that, with reference to
commodities in general, it has risen, and the landlord, consequently, is
indemnified.

The next paragraph we transcribe, as a specimen of the obscure and
disjointed mode of reasoning which Mr. Malthus has adopted.

As one consequence of his doctrine concerning the measure of value, he
states,

that the increasing value of the funds destined for the maintenance of
labour can alone occasion an increase in the demand for it, or the will
and power to employ a greater number of labourers; and that it is
consistent with theory, as well as general experience, that high corn
wages, in proportion to the work done, should frequently occur with a
very slack demand for labour; or, in other words, that when the value of
the whole produce falls from excess of supply compared with the demand,
it cannot have the power of setting the same number of labourers to
work.

(P. 55.)

This is Mr. M.’s favourite doctrine of over-production.2 A more
mischievous doctrine, we think, has scarcely ever been broached in
political economy: since, if we are liable to have too large a produce,
a Government must be highly praiseworthy, which in its loving kindness
steps forward to relieve us of one part of this insupportable burden. On
other occasions, Mr. M. has adduced, in proof of this doctrine,
arguments which have at least the merit of being intelligible. That,
however, which is couched in the above paragraph, would require the
exercise of no small sagacity in its interpretation, were not this task
happily rendered unnecessary by the utter unmeaningness of the phrase
upon which the whole argument, such as it is, appears to turn. “The
value of the whole produce falls.” What does this mean? The exchangeable
value? No: for the whole produce can have no exchangeable value, as it
is never, at least collectively, exchanged. Any other kind of value? But
with no other kind have we any thing to do. By value, we uniformly mean
exchangeable value. This is the only legitimate use of the term.

There is another paragraph in proof of the same position.

If the increase of capital be measured by the increase of its materials,
such as corn, clothing, &c. then it is obvious that the supply of these
materials may, by saving, increase so rapidly, compared with labour and
the wants of the effective demanders, that with a greater quantity of
materials, the capitalist will neither have the power nor the will to
set in motion the same quantity of labour, and that consequently the
progress of wealth will be checked, but that if the increase of capital
be measured as it ought to be, by the increase of its power to command
labour, then accumulation so limited, cannot possibly go on too fast.

(P. 57.)

The above assertion, for there is no attempt at argument, may easily be
Edition: current; Page: [59] disproved; but this is not the place for
it. The difficulty is, to see why Mr. M. should have given this as a
consequence of his doctrine concerning the measure of value, between
which and this paragraph we can see no sort of connexion. If, however,
it be such a consequence, it must fall with the doctrine which supports
it.

Soon after, he continues, “If commodities and the materials of capital
increase faster than the effectual demand for them [faster than labour,
we presume, he means], profits fall prematurely, and capitalists are
ruined, without a proportionate benefit to the labouring classes,
because an increasing demand for labour cannot go on under such
circumstances.” (P. 59.) Again, we ask, what has this to do with the
measure of value? As, however, it can be refuted in few words, we will
not grudge the necessary space.

Why do profits fall prematurely? Because, from the increase of capital
faster than labour, wages rise. There is no other cause which can lower
profits. And yet, in the same breath, Mr. M. tells us, that there is no
proportionate benefit to the labouring classes!

If this case were to happen, the only consequence would be, that
accumulation would cease to go on at this enormous rate, and would be
continued only at the same rate with the increase of population. If Mr.
M. confines to this case his doctrine of over-production, we may make
the concession with perfect safety.

Another application.

On the subject of foreign trade, it [the doctrine of the measure] would
shew that its universally acknowledged effect in giving a stimulus to
production, generally, is mainly owing to its increasing the value of
the produce of a country’s labour, by the extension of demand, before
the value of its labour is increased by the increase of its quantity;
and that the effect of every extension of demand, whether foreign or
domestic, is always, as far as it goes, to increase the average rate of
profits till this increase is counteracted by a further accumulation of
capital.

(Pp. 56-7.)

Many and important are the errors contained in this short paragraph. But
it would be loss of time to point them out, as all the proof which Mr.
M. has given falls to the ground with his doctrine of the measure. All
which he himself asserts is, that if that doctrine is true, these
applications are also true.

In another paragraph, Mr. M. says, that value does not depend upon cost
of production, because value is proportioned, not to the advances
merely, but to the advances, together with variable profits. That
allowance is to be made for all cases of difference in the amount of
profits, as compared with immediate expenditure, is allowed on all
hands; but the necessity of this modification does not authorize our
rejecting the general expression, unless Mr. Malthus can point out a
better one, which he has not even attempted to do, but has contented
himself with saying that, “we must have recourse to demand and supply.”
[P. 58.] But this is to stop short at the surface of the science. What
regulates supply? Surely it is the cost of production, and if we cannot
find an accurate expression in Edition: current; Page: [60] one word, or
in two, we are not for that reason to content ourselves with a
superficial view of the subject.

There are two or three other paragraphs of too little importance to
require a refutation. The last and most elaborate of Mr. M.’s
applications relates to the variations in the currency. He dissents from
those who think that paper was depreciated no more than to the extent of
the difference between its value and that of bullion; because, he says,
when compared with labour, it had fallen to a greater extent. [P. 67.]
Those, therefore, who think that Mr. Malthus has failed in proving that
the value of labour is constant, will not be prevented, by any thing
which is here stated (though here too there are tables [p. 75]) from
attributing to labour, and not to the currency, the whole of the
depreciation with respect to labour, over and above the difference
between the market and mint prices of gold.


19.: TECHNICALITIES OF ENGLISH LAW
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 18 SEPT. 1823, P. 2

Arguing one of Bentham’s central tenets, the absurdity of some English
legal practices, Mill in this letter comments on the quashing of cases
on technical grounds. He refers to two accounts in the Morning
Chronicle, “Police News. Hatton-Garden,” 9 Sept., p. 4, and “Police.
Hatton-Garden,” 16 Sept., p. 4. Headed as title, subheaded “To the
Editor of the Morning Chronicle,” the letter is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A letter on the Technicalities of English Law, wch.
appeared in the Chronicle of 18th September 1823. Not signed.” (MacMinn,
p. 3.)

sir,—

In your Paper of Tuesday, the 9th of September, I observed a new
instance of legal quashing. A number of bakers were brought up, on the
charge of selling bread otherwise than by weight. It was discovered that
the Magistrate’s name had not been inserted in the indictment, and in
consequence of this omission, the charge fell to the ground. I also
found in your Paper of Tuesday the 16th, a similar instance of quashing,
because an illiterate informer, instead of writing the word afternoon,
had written after-forenoon.1

If English law were really “the perfection of human reason,”2 no one
would be acquitted, but because he was innocent—no one condemned, but
because he was Edition: current; Page: [61] guilty. To praise a system
under which men are acquitted on any ground, except the insufficiency of
the evidence of guilt, implies either the grossest insincerity, or the
most depraved understanding. All formalities which do not facilitate the
attainment of truth, are utterly useless, and as they almost always
enhance the trouble and expence, they amount to a tax upon justice, and
frequently to the utter denial of it. To this we must add the
complicated evils which ensue, if it be discovered that a formality has
been omitted. The previous proceedings are invalidated, the chance of
impunity to the guilty is increased, and additional trouble and expence
are occasioned to the innocent, by the recommencement of proceedings
which may already have cost them far more than they can bear.

Will any one assert that the omission of the Magistrate’s name in the
indictment, renders it a whit more difficult to determine whether the
parties are guilty or innocent? And if it does not, on what principle
can the quashing of the indictment be justified?

But quashing is the favourite pastime of lawyers; nor is the motive
difficult to divine. Every new indictment brings new fees into the
pockets of Learned Gentlemen. Who can wonder, that a circumstance of
such importance should outweigh in their minds the ruin of a thousand
families.

Quashing is not confined to the prosecution of bakers for selling bread
in an illegal manner. A law suit which has lasted for years may be
rendered useless by the discovery that an insignificant formality has
been omitted at the commencement. And so numerous are these formalities,
that no inconsiderable proportion of the law proceedings which are
instituted in this country terminate in that way. A gentleman may be
deprived of his estate by the discovery of a technical flaw in his
title; so frequently does this occur, that there are few estates, in
Great Britain, the title to which is not liable to dispute, and Mr.
Canning, in Parliament, spoke of an inquiry into the title deeds of
estates as being one of the grossest iniquities which can be
perpetrated.3

When it is proposed to substitute for the present confused and
heterogeneous mass of statutes and cases, a Code constructed, not on a
view of what has been done heretofore, but of what ought to be done
hereafter—a cry is usually raised that such a reform would annihilate
existing rights. Never was accusation more ill-founded, nor does any
thing prove more conclusively than the currency which it has obtained,
how readily mankind consent to take the opinions of the “constituted
authorities” for gospel, on subjects upon which they may and ought to
judge for themselves. The fact is, that the first step of an efficient
reform of the law would be to pass an Act confirming and establishing
all titles in which no flaw could be detected on a retrospect of a very
limited number of years.

But now the omission of an unmeaning formality at a distance of forty or
fifty Edition: current; Page: [62] years, may cast opulent families into
the depth of poverty; and so far is the English law from securing
rights, that every owner of land pays, at an average, 5 per cent. on his
annual rent into the hands of lawyers, on account of the badness of the
law. All this happens under a system which is, notwithstanding, “the
perfection of human reason,” although its rules were all framed six or
seven centuries ago, and although there is not one of them which, in
accuracy, precision, or, if rigidly enforced, even in justice, rises one
step above the level of the age in which it was composed.


20.: SECURITIES FOR GOOD GOVERNMENT
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 25 SEPT., 1823, P. 2

This letter, like No. 19, employs a particular instance in support of an
idea of Bentham’s, in this case the popular removal of judges (see his
Draught of a New Plan for the Organization of the Judicial Establishment
in France [1790], in Works, Vol. IV, p. 359). The case was that of
Richard Battlebar, a tradesman, and Jane Ashwood, “a perfectly
respectable woman” (Examiner, 14 Sept., 1823, p. 605), who were
sentenced on 12 Sept. to one month’s imprisonment at the treadmill, on
suspicion of indecent exposure, by Maurice Swabey (1785-1864),
magistrate at Union Hall, Southwark. Mill picks up the argument of a
letter to the Editor, “Revision of the Magistracy,” Morning Chronicle,
22 Sept., 1823, p. 4, signed “A True Friend of Morality and Social
Order” (not “to Morality,” as Mill says). The case had occasioned much
earlier comment in the Morning Chronicle: see 13 Sept., p. 4, 15 Sept.,
p. 3, and 16 Sept., p. 3 (a letter and a satirical poem, “Love and
Justice”). Headed as title, subheaded “To the Editor of the Morning
Chronicle,” the item is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A letter on
the advantages of a judicial establishment consisting of judges
removeable by the people, in the Chronicle of 24th [sic] September
[1823.] Signed a Friend to Responsible Governments.” (MacMinn, p. 3.)

sir,—

I perused with great satisfaction the Letter inserted in your Paper of
Monday, the 22d, on Police Abuses, signed “A True Friend to Morality and
Social Order.” One passage, however, in that very able Letter, appears
to me objectionable. The writer recommends as a remedy for police
abuses, that several of the individuals at present in the Magistracy
should be removed.

Now, Sir, I am one of those who look at measures rather than men,1 and
who reprobate the former when I conceive them to merit reprobation,
without feeling any peculiar animosity against the latter. My appetite
for change would be Edition: current; Page: [63] satisfied, if the
welfare of the community were exclusively consulted, no matter whether
by one man or another. I know that although some men will yield to a
small temptation, while others cannot be moved but by a great one, yet
upon the whole there are few exceptions, or rather none at all, to the
principle that all men who have power will infallibly abuse it; a
principle the truth of which every one admits with regard to other men,
although each considers himself to be an exception. My object,
therefore, is, to obtain securities for the good conduct of Legislators,
Judges, and Ministers; not to substitute one set of men for another set,
leaving to those whom you nominate the same facilities for abuse of
power which were enjoyed by those whom you remove.

Unless the abuses of the judicial power are such as indicate a radically
unsound and depraved intellect, there is no reason for removing the
individual, although there is great reason for subjecting him to such
responsibility as will effectually prevent the recurrence either of the
same or of other abuses. And if there is no particular reason for
removing him, there is always this reason against it, that the
experience which he has acquired in the exercise of his office, gives
him (ceteris paribus) an advantage over any unpractised candidate.

Now in the recent instances of police abuses, no greater weakness of
intellect appears, than that which is evinced by sacrificing the public
good to the desire of gratifying the whole, or some particular section
of the Aristocracy. When Mr. White dismissed the complaint of Lady
Caroline Lamb’s waiting-woman, on the word of her Ladyship’s husband,
and expelled the Reporters from the Police Office because they had
reported the woman’s story,2 it is easy to see that the feeling
uppermost in the mind of the Worthy Magistrate was a desire of
gratifying such Honourables and Right Honourables as may hereafter be
pleased to quarrel with their servants. In like manner when Mr. Swabey
consigned two low vulgar people to a month’s torture at the tread mill
for indulging in gratifications which their superiors are suffered to
enjoy without restraint, a discerning eye might detect in this specimen
of Magisterial delicacy, a disposition to curry favour with a certain
Society,3 and with the numerous and powerful portion of the Aristocracy
by which that Society is patronized. And I am persuaded that this
puerile ambition is at the bottom of almost every instance of injustice
which is perpetrated in this country by what are called Courts of
Justice as well as of Law, but which should only be termed Courts of
Law.

Far be it from me to object the desire of pleasing great people to these
Magistrates as a crime. It is the unavoidable result of their situation.
In a country Edition: current; Page: [64] where there is an aristocracy
interested in injustice, and where the judges are dependent upon the
aristocracy, the judges will be unjust. Alter the circumstances, and
they will be unjust no longer. Place the judicial office on such a
footing that it shall not be necessary for them to conciliate the favour
of the aristocracy, and that it shall be necessary for them to obtain
that of the people; and then it will be no longer the interest of the
aristocracy, but that of the people, which will be consulted. For the
attainment of this object, I see no other expedient, than that of giving
to the people, either immediately or through their representatives, the
power of removing judges of all descriptions from their offices. Let the
power be given, and the necessity for the exercise of it will rarely
occur. If it be not given, then even if the popular voice made itself
heard so strongly as to effect the removal of one or a few obnoxious
magistrates, there would be no permanent good, for there would be no
securities for good judicature, and as soon as the violent excitement of
the public mind subsided, misgovernment would return with undiminished
vigour.

A Friend to Responsible Governments


21.: PARLIAMENTARY REFORM
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 3 OCT., 1823, P. 4

This letter may be read as a Radical corollary of James Mill’s
“Government.” Many of its arguments appeared in J.S. Mill’s writings in
this period (e.g., the assertion of an unlimited desire for power is
also in No. 20). The signature “Quesnai” presumably alludes to François
Quesnay (1694-1774), the French economist, who argued that the principle
of general interest should govern the economic life of nations, and
looked to liberty, security, and justice as the means to prosperity for
all classes of society. Headed as title, subheaded “To the Editor of the
Morning Chronicle,” the item is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A
letter signed Quesnai, on the consequences of denying the capacity of
the people, in the Chronicle of 3d October 1823”

(MacMinn, p. 4).

sir,—

The difference between the Reformers and the Anti-Reformers of this
country is, that the former are friends to a popular government, and the
latter to an aristocracy.

The only ground on which Reform can stand, is the assumption that if the
people had the power of choosing their representatives, they would make,
if not the best, at least a good choice. This accordingly is the
doctrine of the Reformers; and if this be true, it is evident that the
question as to reform admits of no farther debate. The Anti-Reformers on
the other hand, allege that the people are factious, turbulent, inimical
to social order, and to the existence of property. On this ground they
maintain that the existing form of Government, over which the people
exercise no controul, and which is in the strictest sense of the word
Aristocratical, should be preserved.

Let us grant to the Anti-Reformers, the full benefit of the assumption
upon Edition: current; Page: [65] which their resistance to the
Reformers is grounded. Let us admit that the people, if they had the
choice of their Rulers, would infallibly make a bad choice, and so bad a
choice, as to render the attainment of good Government in this mode
utterly hopeless. That this would silence the claims of the Reformers is
unquestionable. Let us examine, however, whether it is not equally
unfavourable to the pretensions of their opponents.

It is indisputable, that if any person has the power of pillaging the
people for his own benefit, and of forcing them to act in entire
subservience to his interests, he will do so. This is implied in the
common outcry against despotism. And if this be admitted of one man, it
cannot be denied of any set of men less than the majority of the whole
population. Against this propensity to pillage the people, and to reduce
them to subservience, no check can be opposed, because the people alone
have an interest in establishing a check; and the people, by
supposition, are not to be trusted. All which can be done, is to vest
unrestrained power in such hands, that the motive to abuse it shall be
reduced within the narrowest possible limits.

Now it is evident, that as far as pillage is concerned, far less will
suffice to satiate the rapacity of one man than of a thousand; and then,
as to personal subservience, it is a smaller evil to serve one master
than a great number. In so far, therefore, as the personal desires of
the Sovereign are concerned, less mischief is likely to arise from the
rule of one, than of an irresponsible few.

This appears at first sight inconsistent with history. But if we look
back to the annals of despotism, we shall find that the oppressions
which they exhibit have been severe exactly in proportion as the Monarch
has been insecure. The tyrants in Greece were so sanguinary, only
because they were in continual danger of being overthrown. The Pachas in
Turkey plunder the people with such grinding extortion, only because
they do not hold their office on a week’s tenure. In fact, it is
evident, that if the Monarch were perfectly secure, perfectly certain of
never being molested in the exercise of his power, he would be satisfied
with extracting from the people such a portion of the annual produce of
land and labour as would abundantly supply all his appetites and
passions; and when there is but one man to satiate, this is but a small
portion. Despotism would be very moderately oppressive, if the despot
were perfectly secure, but not being so, he is under the necessity of
purchasing support by the plunder of the people. He must maintain a
large military force to compel passive obedience—a large ecclesiastical
establishment to inculcate it.

But as this Army and this Priesthood will employ their power, not for
him, but against him, unless he can make it their interest to do
otherwise, he cannot support his dominion unless he satiates, not
himself alone, but them, with the spoil of the people. Despotism,
therefore, owes by far the greatest part of its mischievousness to the
insecurity of the Monarch. If he could be made perfectly secure—if he
were released, not only from all legal, but from all moral Edition:
current; Page: [66] responsibility—if men could be persuaded, that to
oppose the behest of their Sovereign, or even to speak of him or of his
acts with any thing short of the most unbounded and submissive
veneration, was a most important violation of morality—then the Monarchs
would be to them nearly as a shepherd to his flock. He would oppress
them no farther than by extorting from them the means of satiating every
possible desire, and in every other respect, it would be decidedly his
interest to leave them perfect freedom of action.

It appears then, that if the people are not to be trusted, the least bad
of all possible Governments must be, that in which all the powers of
Government are concentrated in the hands of one man, and when that man
is entirely exempt from all controul, either from the laws of from
public opinion, a more unlimited despotism than has ever yet existed in
the world.

There would, it is true, be grave inconveniences attending on this form
of government. First, pillage even by one man is an evil, but this is
not the worst. An absolute King, having little or no motive to acquire
distinguished intellect, weak Monarchs would frequently fill the throne;
and although they would not oppress the people more than Monarchs of
vigorous intellect, they would be less capable of protecting them from
the aggressions of one another. But although the folly and weakness of
the Monarch would prove highly mischievous, it could not produce such
lamentable effects as infallibly arise from an aristocratic government,
whose interest it is to extract from the people as much in every way as
they can be prevailed on to part with, and who, in proportion as they
are wiser and better instructed, will only pursue that interest with
more unerring certainty.

Thus, then, it appears that, to a man who reasons consistently, there is
no medium between advocating a popular government, and standing up for
absolute despotism. If the people are capable of making a good choice,
with them the choice ought to rest. If they are not capable, he with
whom the general happiness is the regulating principle of his judgments,
will stop no where short of the completest conceivable despotism. But,
he who, while he professes a horror of absolute power, opposes all
propositions tending to vest an effective checking power in the
people—such a man leaves no inference to be drawn, save either that his
reasoning faculty is in a deplorable state of depravation, or that he is
blinded by being himself a member of the governing aristocracy, whose
rule is far more inimical to happiness than a secure and unlimited
despotism. Hobbes, who is branded by all Englishmen as the advocate of
despotism, had this advantage over the anti-reformers of the present
day, that he reasoned consistently from the principle of the incapacity
of the people,1 which they equally with him adopt, but from which they
reason only so far as suits the particular end which they have in view.

Quesnai

Edition: current; Page: [67]


22.: ATROCITIES OF THE TREAD WHEEL
 GLOBE AND TRAVELLER, 3 OCT., 1823, P. 3

This article is based on Bentham’s ideas as developed in James Mill’s
“Prisons and Prison Discipline” (1823), written for the Supplement to
the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Editions of the Encyclopaedia Britannica,
Vol. VI, pp. 385-95. Both the quotation from and reference to the ideas
in Prison Labour, Etc.: Correspondence and Communications Addressed to
His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department,
Concerning the Introduction of Tread-Mills into Prisons (London: Nicol,
1823) by John Coxe Hippisley (1748-1825), M.P. for Sudbury, magistrate,
actually derive from a letter to Hippisley of 7 June, 1823 (on pp. 23-66
of the work) from Dr. John Mason Good (1764-1867), physician and medical
writer. The tread wheel (or treadmill) had been introduced to prisons
only five years earlier, in 1818. Headed “Tread Wheel. [From a
Correspondent.],” the unsigned article is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “An article on the atrocities of the Tread Wheel which
appeared in the Globe & Traveller of 4th [sic] October 1823”

(MacMinn, p. 4).

by the publication of Sir J.C. Hippisley’s work on Prison Discipline,
the public attention has been called to the mischievous effects of a
punishment which has been hailed as the great modern improvement in
penal legislation—the Tread Wheel.

There are strong objections to the employment of labour, in any case, as
a punishment. If we consider from what causes men are induced to commit
that species of crimes which are most common—petty violations of
property—it will be found that in the great majority of cases, it is
aversion to labour which has been the operating motive. To prevent
crime, means ought to be taken to counteract the painful associations
which give rise to this aversion. For such a purpose no contrivance can
be worse chosen than that of forcing labour, and that of the severest
kind, upon the offender as a punishment.

When a poor man is at large, earning his bread by his exertions, unless
his labour be excessive, there are many circumstances which tend to make
it agreeable to him. It is to labour that he owes all the comforts and
enjoyments of existence. By labour alone can he hope to advance himself
in life and raise the prospects of his family. All this has not been
sufficient to counteract his habits of indolence, for those habits have
prevailed, and instead of labouring he has turned thief; and yet in
order to cure him of his aversion to labour, he is placed in a situation
where, instead of being the source of his enjoyments, it becomes an
engine of unrequited misery to him, and of misery of the most intense
description.

This objection applies strongly to all kinds of labour, when considered
merely as a punishment; but most of all, to the tread-mill, the horrors
of which, as described by Sir John Cox Hippisley, appear unequalled in
the modern annals of legalized torture.

Edition: current; Page: [68]
I inspected the men as they descended in rotation from the wheel, at the
end of the quarter of an hour’s task-work, and made room for fresh
relays. Every one of them was perspiring—some in a dripping sweat. On
asking them separately, and at a distance from each other, where was the
chief stress of labour, they stated, in succession, and without the
least variation, that they suffered great pain in the calf of the leg
and in the ham; while most of them, though not all, complained of
distress also in the instep. On examining the bottom of their shoes, it
was manifest that the line of tread had not extended farther than from
the extremity of the toes to about one-third of the bottom of the foot;
for in several instances the shoes were new, and between this line and
the heel altogether unsoiled—a fact, however, that was as obvious from
the position of the foot while at work, as from the appearance of the
shoe at rest. Several of the workers seemed to aim at supporting their
weight by bringing the heel into action, the feet being twisted
outwards; and on inquiring why this was not oftener accomplished, the
reply was, that though they could gain a little in this way, it was with
so painful a stress of the knees that they could only try it
occasionally. The palms of their hands, in consequence of holding tight
to the rail, were in every instance hardened, in many horny, in some
blistered, and discharging water. The keeper, who accompanied us,
admitted the truth of all these statements, and added that it was the
ordinary result of the labour; and that use did not seem to render it
less severe; for those who had been confined long appeared to suffer
nearly or altogether as much as those who were new to the work.

[Pp. 31-2.]

Sir J.C. Hippisley also states on good medical authority, that this kind
of labour has a strong tendency to produce varicose tumours and
ruptures, also, that the tortuous attitude and uneasy motion totally
deprive the prisoner of the healthful advantage of athletic exercise.

On the female prisoners the effects are of a still more serious and
distressing nature, in as much, that in the greater number of counties
where tread-wheel labour exists, it has not been deemed safe to extend
it to females. Nor are these evils chimerical. Sir J. C. Hippisley
mentions the particular prisons in which they have been experienced, and
gives various details concerning the Cold-bath Fields House of
Correction, for which we refer our readers to the work itself. [Pp.
33-7.]

It is true that the communications received from the Governors of the
various prisons in which the tread-wheel is in use, in answer to the
official circular of Mr. Peel, have not been in any great degree
unfavourable to the tread-mill.1 The admissions, however, which they
have made, and which are stated by Sir J.C. Hippisley, are fully
sufficient to justify the inferences which Sir J. has drawn from them.
And were it otherwise, Ilchester gaol has taught us not to judge of
prison arrangements on the word of the prison authorities2—more
especially of Edition: current; Page: [69] arrangements so well
calculated as the tread-mill to be instruments of oppression in the
hands of those authorities themselves.

Among other circumstances which essentially unfit the tread-mill to be a
good engine of punishment is the extreme inequality of the labour;
which, it is plain, does not admit of being proportioned with any
exactness to the constitution and previous habits of the prisoner, nor
can it be proportioned at all, without leaving much to the discretion of
the gaoler. “A man who has been accustomed to running up stairs all his
life, with good lungs and muscular legs, will scarcely suffer by it,
while an asthmatic tailor, weaver, or other sedentary artisan, will be
half killed by the exercise.”*

As if it had been endeavoured to devise a mode of punishment which
should unite the fewest possible advantages, the tread-mill discipline,
besides its cruelty, its inequality, and its injurious effects upon
health, has not even the advantage of being an efficient kind of labour.
There are many ways of turning a mill more advantageously than by human
labour. Moreover, it does not, like the hand crank-mill, exercise the
muscles which are of use in ordinary labour. It does not give those
bodily habits which will render labour less irksome after release,
while, as we have shown, it strongly tends to give such habits of mind
as will render it more so. Nor is the tread-wheel labour efficient in
the way of example. To be so, it should be visible to every eye. But it
is unavoidably shut up within the walls of a prison, and can operate
directly upon the minds of none but the prisoners.

Let it not be inferred, however, that we are adverse to the employment
of labour in prison discipline. Labour, not tread-wheel labour, but
mild, and at the same time efficient and productive labour, though
highly unfit for purposes of punishment, is the best of all engines of
reformation. But these two kinds of discipline must be kept entirely
separate. The object of punishment is to inflict pain—pain sufficient to
counteract the motives to vice. The object of reformatory discipline is
to break pernicious habits, and to substitute useful ones. If, as has
been observed, the habit which brings criminals to gaol is usually an
aversion to labour, the grand object of reformatory discipline should be
to destroy that aversion. The mode of destroying it is not by making
labour an engine of torture. It is by making it a source of pleasure; by
suffering the labourer to partake of the fruits of his labour, and that
in sufficient quantity to make him think of labour with some degree of
pleasure. It is evident, then, that if punishment, which is intended
merely as an infliction of pain, be mixed up with reformatory
discipline, which can be made effectual only by rendering the condition
of the prisoner a state of pleasure, either the one of these two objects
must be entirely sacrificed to the other, or the ends of both must be
incompletely Edition: current; Page: [70] and inefficiently attained. In
fact, we think that nearly all the failures which have taken place in
the organization of prison arrangements, may be attributed to an
ignorance of this fundamental rule, that punishment and reformation are
two different objects, and as such, should be kept distinct: a position
which appears to have occurred to no writer antecedent to the
publication of the article “Prisons” in the Supplement to the
Encyclopaedia Britannica, to which, for farther illustrations we beg to
refer our readers.


23.: PRACTICABILITY OF REFORM IN THE LAW
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 8 OCT., 1823, P. 4

This letter, reflecting Mill’s continuing interest in Benthamite law
reform and his tutoring in the preceding year by John Austin
(1790-1859), Benthamite disciple and close acquaintance of the Mills,
appears to have no occasional cause. Headed as title, subheaded “To the
Editor of the Morning Chronicle,” it is described in Mill’s bibliography
as “A letter on the practicability of reform in the law, which appeared
in the Chronicle of 8th October 1823. Not signed.” (MacMinn, p. 4.)

sir,—

That numerous and powerful body, the practising Lawyers, whose opinions
the public adopt far too implicitly on the subject of Legislation, have
an evident interest in the permanence of the confused and unintelligible
mass which now bears the name of law in this country. In proportion as
the law is complicated, the influence of the only class who can
interpret it must increase; and it is as little to be expected that
Lawyers should advocate the adoption of an intelligible system of law,
as it was in the time of the Reformation, that the Priests should
consent to suffer the Laity to peruse the sacred volume.

We need not therefore be surprised that lawyers should have a number of
fallacies at command, with which they combat all attempts at reform in
the law. Of these dicta, one of the most frequent is, that it is
impossible to devise general rules which shall include all particular
cases.

This notion originates in a confusion between questions of law and
questions of fact. The latter are innumerable: there is no one case
which in all its circumstances exactly resembles another case. It is
therefore impracticable to make rules for the decision of all questions
of fact. But the questions of law which arise may easily be reduced
under a very small number of heads.

Let us consider on what questions every law-suit must necessarily turn.
In civil cases the subject of the dispute is, to which of two persons a
particular right belongs. Each of them, in order to prove the justice of
his claim, affirms that one of those events has happened which give
commencement to the right; in the case of an article of property, for
instance, that he has bought it, inherited it, and the like. His
adversary either denies this event, or affirms that another event has
Edition: current; Page: [71] occurred, which gives termination to the
right, that he has sold the property, or forfeited it by some subsequent
transaction. The question of fact, therefore, is, whether the alleged
events have happened, which of course must be determined by the
evidence. The questions of law are, in the first place, what the right
is; and next, whether the alleged events, supposing them to have
happened, are of the number of those which commence, or which terminate
the right?

The problem, therefore, of making a Civil Code, consists of two parts.
It must be determined what rights it is expedient to create; and it must
be determined what events shall give commencement, and what shall give
termination to a man’s enjoyment of the rights.

Neither of these is surely an impossible task. A right is the
permission, granted by the law, to make a particular use of a person or
of a thing. Now it may surely be determined what uses a man shall be
suffered to make of his property, what rights he shall be allowed to
exercise over his servants, his family, &c.; and reciprocally, what
services they shall have the power of exacting from him. The events
also, on the occurrence of which these rights shall begin or terminate,
may surely be defined. These are, the modes of acquiring and of losing
property, and the like.

To determine all these questions is to make a civil code, which will
apply to every individual case that can be conceived; since there is no
case in which, when the state of the facts is ascertained, the dispute
can turn on any question, except the extent of a right, the facts which
confer the right, or the facts which take it away.

Nor is it more difficult to construct a body of penal legislation which
shall extend to all cases whatever. All rights having been defined, it
only remains to assign an appropriate punishment to every violation of
those rights.

It appears, then, that there is not that inherent impossibility in
devising general rules to fit particular cases, which is affirmed by
lawyers to exist. Moreover, it is evident that in all cases which are
not left absolutely to the discretion of the Judge, whenever any rule is
consulted, even if one decision is made a rule for another, this is
applying a general rule to a particular case. The Judge says, A shall
enjoy a certain right, in consequence of a certain event; because, Sir
Matthew Hale says,1 that this event is sufficient to confer the right;
or because Lord Chief Justice somebody declared in the case B versus C,
that B became entitled to enjoy the same right, in consequence of the
same event. Is it not evident that in both these cases, the Judge is
deciding according to a general rule laid down by his predecessors, that
the event in question shall always confer the right in question? So that
the dispute between the Lawyers and the Reformers of the Law, is not
whether it is possible to devise general rules, for this is done by
Edition: current; Page: [72] both parties alike; but whether these
general rules shall be fixed or variable; and whether they shall be
formed upon the universal experience of mankind,—in other words, upon
philosophic principles, or upon an induction of one or two instances
only,—in other words upon precedents and cases.


24.: OLD AND NEW INSTITUTIONS
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 17 OCT., 1823, P. 2

This letter is in response to the speech on 9 Oct. to the Chester Whig
Club by Colonel William Lewis Hughes (1767-1852), M.P. for Wallingford
(1806-31), reported in the Morning Chronicle, 13 Oct., 1823, p. 2, in
which Hughes was at pains to put distance between the terms “Whig” and
“Radical, and Rebel.” In the passage referred to by Mill, Hughes said,
“We seek no new institutions—we claim only for the people their
inalienable rights,” a remark galling to the Philosophic Radicals.
Headed as title, subheaded “To the Editor of the Morning Chronicle,” the
item is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A letter on Old and New
Institutions signed ‘No Worshipper of Antiquity,’ which appeared in the
Chronicle of 17th October 1823”

(MacMinn, p. 4).

sir,—

In Colonel Hughes’s late speech at the Chester Whig Meeting, most of the
principles of which meet with my warmest approbation, I however find one
passage to which I cannot agree. The Colonel disclaims a wish to
introduce new institutions, and only wishes to restore the Constitution
to its pristine purity.

I am well aware that this is the ordinary language of those with whom
Reform is only the watchword of a party—of those who wish for the
removal only of trifling abuses, leaving untouched those great ones in
which all the others originate. But that such a man as Colonel Hughes
should give in to this cant is what, certainly, I did not expect.

I am one of those, Sir, who are friends, and not enemies to innovation;
for I wish to see the human race well governed—which would certainly be
the greatest of innovations. All history proves, that in every nation of
the earth, the powers of Government have uniformly been monopolized in
the hands of a privileged few, who, accordingly, never failed to abuse
those powers for the benefit of themselves and of their connections,
with only one difference, that of old, when the public were far more
ignorant and prejudiced than they now are, misgovernment was
proportionally more flagrant.

We are told of the wisdom of our ancestors. Let us look back to what by
an abuse of terms is called venerable antiquity, and which in fact was
the nonage of the world; let us consider for a moment who and of what
use were these ancestors, whom it is incumbent on us in the nineteenth
century to reverence and worship. Those sages who firmly believed, that
St. Dunstan tweaked the evil Edition: current; Page: [73] spirit by the
nose,1 that Aves and Credos, holy water, and the relics of saints were
infallible safeguards in the hour of danger, and that a comet or an
eclipse portended the ruin of an Empire—those worthies, whose brutality
and licentiousness mastered every good feeling, and yielded only to
slavish reverence for ascetic and bigotted Priests. Such “ancestors” as
these are indeed worthy of being held up as patterns for us their
degenerate “sons.” Why are we not also required, in imitation of them,
to put thousands to death by the most excruciating torments, for heresy,
magic, witchcraft and sorcery?

Let us consider for one moment what would have been the consequence, if
reverence for our ancestors had prevented us from adopting improvements
in the physical, as it has in the moral sciences. We should never then
have been initiated into the wonders of chemistry and of natural
philosophy. We should never have seen the air pump, the spinning jenny,
or the steam engine. No canals, no bridges, should we have had; and our
roads would have remained inferior to the worst lanes of the present
day. The press, and all the wonders which it has produced, would never
have had existence.

It were indeed strange, if at that period of our history, when all the
other arts and sciences were in their infancy—when the earth was
believed to be a flat surface in the centre of the universe, and the sea
to flow round its outer circumference—when the philosopher’s stone and
the universal medicine were the only objects of chemistry, and to
foretel events by the stars, the sole purpose of astronomy; when wool,
the only material of clothing, was carded and spun by hand, and when
navigators rarely trusted themselves out of sight of the shore. It were
strange, I say, if a people among whom these things were, should, amid
all their ignorance, superstition, and barbarism, have taken enlarged
views of human nature and of human society—should have foreseen all
possible modes of oppression, and have provided efficient securities
against all—should, in a word, have established a Constitution which
could secure in perpetuity the blessings of good government to mankind.

Happily we are much wiser than our ancestors; it were a shame if we were
not, seeing that we have all their experience, and much more in addition
to it. We look back with contempt upon all which they did in the field
of physical and mechanical knowledge. It is only in moral and political
science that we are not ashamed to bow submission to their authority.

This will not appear strange, if it be considered what influence the
ruling few Edition: current; Page: [74] must necessarily exercise over
the opinions and feelings of the subject many. The few profit by the
existing Government; if a better were substituted, they would cease to
receive more than their due share of the benefit.

Sir James Mackintosh, in his Vindiciae Gallicae ([2nd ed.,] p. 120n),
makes the following observations:

Mechanics, because no passion or interest is concerned in the perpetuity
of abuse, always yield to scientific improvement. Politics, for the
contrary reason, always resist it. It was the remark of Hobbes, that if
any interest or passion were concerned in disputing the theorems of
geometry, different opinions would be maintained regarding them. It has
actually happened (as if to justify the remark of that great man), that
under the administration of Turgot, a financial reform, grounded on a
mathematical demonstration, was derided as visionary nonsense. So much
for the sage preference of practice to theory.2

One word more on innovation. They who do not fall into the egregious
absurdity of throwing indiscriminate censure upon innovation, as if it
were a necessary inference—because a thing is new, therefore it is bad;
but who, nevertheless, wish to keep some measures with those who raise
the cry against improvement; these half-and-half-men frequently repel
the charge of loving innovation, by giving us to understand that they do
not love it for its own sake. A most extraordinary merit, in truth! I
will venture to affirm, that I have never yet either seen or heard of
any one who loved innovation for its own sake. I have seen men who
desired to effect pernicious innovations; but it was always from a view
of some real or imaginary good, either to society, or to themselves
individually.

To conclude, whenever I hear the cry against innovation, I always
presume that the cause, in defence of which it is raised, is a bad one.
For I am sure, that if it were a good one, its advocates could find some
more substantial reason in its defence than merely the antiquity of the
opinions which favour it, and the novelty of contrary opinions. And I
cannot but consider, that he who, like Colonel Hughes, has a good cause
to defend, calculates very ill if he avails himself of an argument which
will serve a bad cause with as much success as a good one, when so many
cogent arguments may be drawn from the real merits of the case.

No Worshipper of Antiquity

Edition: current; Page: [75]


25.: REPUTED THIEVES
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 30 OCT., 1823, P. 2

This letter glosses “Liberty of the Subject,” a letter by “Vindex” (of
St. John’s Square), dated 20 Oct., that appeared in the Morning
Chronicle of 23 Oct., p. 4. (In that letter Vindex, the employer of the
boy sent to the treadmill, refers to his earlier letter, “Unjustifiable
Conduct of a Constable,” which was sent to the Morning Chronicle, but
not published.) Rogers, the magistrate, is linked by Mill with Maurice
Swabey (see No. 20), the quashing of whose convictions is reported in
“The Late Convictions under the Vagrant Act,” The Times, 20 Oct., 1823,
p. 3. The apprehension of “reputed thieves” by a constable was provided
for by 3 George IV, c. 55, Sect. 21 (1822), an addition to the Temporary
Vagrancy Act, 3 George IV, c. 40 (1822). Mill’s letter, signed “The
Censor of the Judges” as is No. 16, is headed as title, subheaded “To
the Editor of the Morning Chronicle,” and is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A letter on the practice of sending reputed thieves to
the treadmill, signed the Censor of the Judges, which appeared in the
Chronicle of 29th [sic] October 1823”

(MacMinn, p. 4).

sir,—

The case which was communicated to you by your correspondent Vindex, on
Thursday the 23d instant, is worthy of attention, as a specimen of the
paternal solicitude of Magistrates for the safety of our property. A boy
was seen by a petty constable in the street looking at a game at
marbles. For this heinous offence, he was carried before the sitting
magistrate, Mr. Rogers; and on the oath of the constable that he was a
reputed thief (although his master was so entirely ignorant of his true
character, as to speak highly in his praise), he was sent by Mr. Rogers
to solace himself at the Tread Mill.

This vigilant Magistrate probably took example from one of the Swabey
convictions, recently quashed at the Kingston Sessions. On a public
occasion, an individual was seen in a crowd by a police officer. He was
not, indeed, attempting to commit any criminal act, by the confession of
the officer he was merely standing in the crowd like any one else. But
then the officer knew him to be a reputed thief, or, at least, to keep
company with reputed thieves: besides, on searching his pockets, he
discovered a pair of scissors, inclosed in a sheath, whereupon he
carried him before that active guardian of public morals, Mr. Swabey, by
whom he was sent to the Tread-mill, under the Vagrant Act.

Some incredulous critics, indeed, have presumed to insinuate that a
reputed thief means a person thought or said to be a thief, and that it
is somewhat hard to punish a man for being so unfortunate as to fall
under suspicion; they have farther ventured to hint that a man may have
an enemy, sufficiently unprincipled to affirm, in the hearing of an
officer, that he is a thief; or that, in a moment of irritation, any one
may apply to him that name; and that, in all these cases, an officer of
little discernment might, with a safe conscience, swear him to be a
reputed thief. Nay, these sceptical reasoners have carried their
audacity so far, as Edition: current; Page: [76] to doubt whether the
veracity of a police officer always deserves implicit confidence; seeing
that he has a strong interest in perjury, as a means of acquiring (not
to speak of bribes), a character for zeal and activity, without the
trouble of hunting out real offenders; seeing, moreover, that he may
perjure himself with perfect safety, since it is utterly impossible for
any one to prove that he is not a reputed thief.

But Mr. Swabey and Mr. Rogers are well aware that scepticism is an
infallible sign of a narrow understanding. Superior to vulgar
prejudices, they know how to place a proper degree of confidence in the
virtue of mankind: and indeed it were strange, if that perfect veracity
which so eminently distinguishes watchmen, did not extend to their
fellow labourers in the cause of social order, the police officers.

With all due deference, however, to such high authorities, I cannot help
thinking that this anxiety to punish reputed thieves implies an
incapability of detecting real ones. If the perpetrators of every
offence were duly brought to trial and punished, is it not clear that
every one who is convicted as a reputed thief would, if innocent, be
punished for no crime at all, and, if guilty, be punished twice for the
same offence? One of two things, therefore, is the case—either the
punishing of reputed thieves is utterly absurd and wicked; or the state
of the law is such, that crimes frequently escape detection and
punishment.

The case is, that the laws against theft are so disproportionately
severe, that out of ten who are robbed, nine are unwilling to prosecute;
that the expences of the law are so enormous, that out of a hundred who
are willing to prosecute, ninety-nine have it not in their power; and,
lastly, that be the fact as clear as the sun at noon-day, it is much
more than an even chance that the thief escapes by a quibble.

To remove these obstacles, the wise framers of the Vagrant Act permit
summary convictions, not for actual, but for reputed theft. There is
ingenuity in the contrivance; but I venture to submit as a sort of
insinuation, whether it would not be better to remove the obstacles to
the detection of criminals, by mitigating the Penal Code, by abolishing
law taxes,1 by simplifying the law so that hired advocates shall not be
needed, and by abolishing all the absurd fictions, all the quirks and
quibbles, by which justice is so often eluded in the English Courts of
Law.

They will not do this; it would hurt the interest of Learned Gentlemen.
But to see men of unblemished character treading at the mill for being
reputed by a Police officer to be thieves, neither hurts their interests
nor their feelings. When Edition: current; Page: [77] will the public
learn to think for themselves, instead of trusting to those who are
interested in deceiving them?

The Censor of the Judges


26.: EFFECTS OF GAMBLING
 LANCET, 9 NOV., 1823, PP. 214-16

This article gives early indication of Mill’s participation in the
nature vs. nurture debate, in which he enlisted on the side of education
and environment, without endorsing the views of the necessitarians or
Owenites. The case here referred to is that of John Thurtell
(1794-1824), who murdered a fellow-swindler, William Weare, on 24 Oct.,
1823, and was hanged on 9 Jan., 1824. Mill’s reference to “students of
our profession” is surely a guise intended to associate his argument
with the concerns of medicine (or it may have been added by the editor);
he had no medical training, and his brief legal training is not
specially germane. The article, Mill’s only contribution to the Lancet,
the (initially) weekly radical medical journal, is headed “[From a
Correspondent] / The Late Murder / Effects of Gambling,” and is
described in Mill’s bibliography as “An article on the evil consequences
of gaming which appeared in the Lancet of 9th November 1823”

(MacMinn, p. 4).

when human nature exhibits, as she occasionally does, an example of all
kinds of wickedness concentrated in one man, we feel a melancholy
interest in looking back upon the events of his life, and tracing the
various circumstances which, by their conspiring influence, formed his
mind to guilt, and eradicated all those associations, or prevented them
from being formed, which cause an ordinary character to shudder at the
thought of shedding the blood of a fellow creature.

Indolent and superficial reasoners would willingly arrest the inquiring
mind in the search after those hidden causes by which the human
character is formed. If a shocking instance of depravity presents itself
to their notice, they do not say. That man was an idler, a drunkard, or
a gamester; but That man was naturally of a bad disposition: as if men
were robbers and murderers by constitution, and gave proof in the cradle
of the atrocities which they were destined to commit.

With what face can a man who believes in innate depravity, hold up the
fate of a murderer as an example, and warn all who are witnesses of it,
to beware of the vices which conduct men to such an end? As consistently
might a believer in fatality enlarge upon the necessity of obeying the
dictates of prudence. The person to whom the admonition is addressed,
might well reply, that it is unnecessary, since, if his nature is
corrupt, it is in vain to struggle against it; but if he has a natural
disposition to virtue, all exhortation to follow that disposition is
superfluous. This doctrine, therefore, must raise up a blind confidence
in the minds of the innocent, and must prevent them from taking the
necessary Edition: current; Page: [78] precautions against those baneful
habits which lead to vice: while they, who have already entered into the
downhill path of wickedness, are prevented from a timely reform, by the
thought that all their efforts would be unavailing.

Nor is the doctrine which we are combating less unfounded than
mischievous. It is truly astonishing upon how little evidence this
opinion has obtained currency in the world—such currency that the
phraseology to which it has given rise, is, perhaps, equally universal
with the use of language. It remains yet to be proved, that men are born
either virtuous or wicked—either predisposed to morality or to vice. The
only proof which it has ever been attempted to assign, is the enormous
difference which exists between the most virtuous and the most vicious
of men. The differences of character are indeed great; but so are the
differences of external circumstances. And as it is generally admitted
that circumstances often overcome the effect of natural predisposition,
while no proof has ever been given that natural predisposition can
overcome external circumstances: we are at liberty to conclude, that in
ascribing to any person a natural and original disposition to vice, men
are following the very common practice of representing as natural that
which is only habitual, merely because they do not recollect its
beginning, and will not take the trouble to inquire into its cause.

If, then, wickedness is not the effect of nature, but of external
circumstances, that inquiry cannot fail to be interesting, which traces
up that complicated and lamentable effect to the several causes which
produced it. But most of all will such an inquiry be valuable, if it
points out to us as the original root of all the evil, not some
circumstances peculiar to the guilty individual, but habits and
practices common to him with a great number; and which, although they do
not conduct their votaries either to equal depravity or to equal
punishment, infallibly bring about a radical corruption of character,
and lead them continually to the brink of the most atrocious crimes.

Our readers will have long ago anticipated the subject of our present
observations. The principal perpetrator of the late murder, John
Thurtell, was a murderer only after he had been a gamester, and only, as
it appears, because he had been a gamester.

The process by which gaming effects so complete a corruption of the
character is two-fold. First, It reduces the gamester, not gradually,
but suddenly, to that necessitous state where the temptation to crime is
the strongest. Secondly, There is no practice capable of being pointed
out, which so entirely roots out all good habits, and implants in their
stead so many bad ones.

We are satisfied that if the unfortunate men who are executed for theft,
or forgery, were interrogated concerning the original and primary cause
of the distress which occasioned the crime, it would be found, in a
great proportion of instances, that this distress was brought on by
gaming. But it is not even by the distress which it creates, and the
temptation which it frequently holds out to Edition: current; Page: [79]
crime, that this destructive vice produces its worst effects. A mind
which experiences the agonizing vicissitudes of the gaming table, soon
becomes so habituated to strong excitement, that, like the body of the
habitual drunkard, it is insensible to every stimulus of a gentler kind.
It is totally and for ever unfitted to resume habits of diligence and
industry; and the habits which it has acquired are in themselves, such
as, above all others, tend to produce crime. Continually liable to
perish by starvation, the gamester does not consider his perils much
enhanced when, to be released from that danger, he exposes himself to
the terrors of the law. And the habit of relying upon chance makes him
trust to the chance of escape, even when the possibility is next to
nothing. In no other way can the apparent coolness and indifference of
Thurtell be accounted for, where it must be evident that the chance of
escaping detection scarcely deserved the name of a possibility.

It is a question well deserving of consideration, how far Government or
its officers are justified in any direct interference to prevent these
practices. It would be a chimerical expectation, that the vice of gaming
could be eradicated by positive enactment. But there can be no doubt,
that public gaming-houses contribute greatly to the encouragement of
this vice. Unwary persons, perhaps, recently arrived in London, (and we
particularly address our observations to students of our profession,)
and not yet aware of the dangers to which they are exposed, are
frequently entrapped, and carried into one of these houses, where they
are made drunk, cheated of their money, and, perhaps, by frequent
repetition, reduced to poverty, while they contract, at the same time,
inveterate habits of gaming. We think that the exertions used for the
suppression of these houses are not by any means so active as they ought
to be. Many notorious hot-beds of vice are still permitted to exist; and
we are convinced, that upon diligent inquiry, their existence would be
found to be connived at by the police officers, who have no interest in
diminishing the number of offences, though they have in obtaining
possession of the persons of the offenders. We think that Mr. Dyer, Mr.
Swabey, and Mr. Rogers, would be better employed in extirpating this
nuisance, than by sending respectable men to the tread-mill for having
the misfortune to be taken ill in Hyde Park,1 or for being considered by
police officers “reputed thieves.”2

Edition: current; Page: [80]


27.: QUESTION OF POPULATION [1]
 BLACK DWARF, 27 NOV., 1823, PP. 748-56

This letter is the first of four by Mill to Thomas Jonathan Wooler
(1786?-1853), editor and publisher of the populist weekly Black Dwarf,
an opponent of the Malthusian principles and practices that Mill had
adopted to the point of being arrested for distribution of birth-control
literature (probably in May 1823). Mill takes exception to the second
part of Wooler’s “Inquiry into the Principles of Population,” printed in
two instalments: the first (including a letter by Francis Place, who was
responsible for the printing of the Neo-Malthusian literature Mill had
distributed) in Black Dwarf, 12 Nov., 1823, pp. 661-3, and the second
ibid., 19 Nov., pp. 693-706. The page references in the text are to this
second part. For further stages in the controversy, see Nos. 28, 31, and
32. The letter, headed as title, is described in Mill’s bibliography as
“A letter on the necessity of checking population, which appeared in the
Black Dwarf of November 20th [sic] 1823, signed A.M.”

(MacMinn, p. 4).

sir,—

Although I do not agree in the view which you take of the important
subject of population, I cannot sufficiently applaud your liberality in
leaving your pages open to the discussion of the question; a degree of
toleration, which, I am sorry to say, few persons who take your side of
this question, can be prevailed on to allow. I hasten to avail myself of
this liberty of discussion, for the purpose of combating the objections
which you stated in your last number against the plan of checking
population [pp. 695-9]; objections which appear to me founded on a
mistaken view of the circumstances upon which the condition of the
labouring classes depends.

It is unnecessary for me to prove, that the working people are in a
state of miserable poverty, since you admit this, and have long been
exerting yourself for the benevolent purpose of improving their
condition. We differ only as to the cause of the distress; which I
maintain to be, excess of population, as compared with the means of
subsistence. You, on the contrary, affirm, that population has no
tendency to increase beyond the means of subsistence; and that
misgovernment is the only cause of the distressed condition of the
working classes.

I should be very sorry to extenuate the miseries of misgovernment. I am,
equally with yourself, a friend to a Radical Reform in the Commons House
of Parliament;—and if I could believe, as you appear to do, that such a
Reform can only be effected by keeping the people in poverty, I should
perhaps hesitate to urge the plan of checking population, until after a
Reform should have been obtained. But I cannot agree with you, that the
working classes will not reform the government unless they are
miserable. On the contrary, I think that so long as they are in poverty,
Reform may be delayed for an unlimited period; but if they were in the
receipt of high wages, they would have leisure to turn their attention
to the abuses of government; and those abuses could not fail of being
speedily reformed.

Edition: current; Page: [81]
I.—You maintain that population has no tendency to increase beyond the
means of subsistence. [Pp. 694-6.] I feel convinced that you are
entirely mistaken; but this is a question of some complication; and
although I shall be ready to discuss it whenever you please, the
practical conclusion, as far as regards the poor man may be shown
without making it depend on this question; and to this point attention
is now requested.

You admit the fact of the distress; but you ascribe it to misgovernment
[pp. 697-8, 703, 705]; meaning, I presume, over-taxation. Now
over-taxation cannot lower wages. It may, indeed, you will say, raise
the prices of the necessaries of life. It will thus injure the working
classes as much as if it operated directly to reduce wages. I shall not
enter into this question at present. I shall concede the point. But I
hope to convince you that it does not affect the question. I admit, for
argument’s sake, that the present rate of wages is such as would enable
the labourer to live in comfort and happiness, but for the pressure of
taxation.

My argument remains the same:—the labourer is now in distress. If he had
double his present wages, with only the same amount of taxation, he
would be in distress no longer. Now each man would have double his
present wages, if the numbers of the people had not been too rapidly
increased.

Does not every working man know, that his employer would give him higher
wages, if he were not sure of obtaining as many men as he wants at the
present rates? And is it not clear that he could not obtain men, if men
in sufficient quantity and out of employment, were not to be had?

There is now a certain quantity of employment. There are as many men as
can be employed, and more; for there is a great number of men out of
work. These men, who are out of work, must either starve, or agree to
take lower wages than their neighbours. The consequence is, that wages
are low, and employment being regarded as a favor, the working man is
often compelled to submit to incivility and insolence from his employer.

Suppose that, instead of excess, there was a deficiency of labourers. At
present a capitalist can always obtain workmen, but a workman cannot
always find an employer. Suppose this order of things reversed: suppose
that there were fewer men than are wanted for the purpose of production.
All the labourers would then be fully employed, and as more would be
wanted than it would be possible to procure, some capitalists, in order
to allure the men from their former employers, would offer high wages;
this would compel the former employers to do the same. Wages would
therefore be high, and employment would no longer be considered as a
favor, but on the contrary, a labourer would be doing a favor to a
capitalist, by working for him, and the capitalists would be compelled
to treat their workmen well.

I infer that it is always wise in the labourers, to keep down their
numbers a little below the means of employment. No men would then be
ever out of work; the difficulty of procuring workmen would compel the
capitalists to offer high Edition: current; Page: [82] wages, and this
they would do in spite of any law to the contrary, however severe that
law might be.

If then so much good is to be done by keeping down the numbers of the
working people, the only question is, between one mode of keeping them
down, and another. It is for the people themselves to decide. For my own
part, I consider the plan of checking population, to be that which
unites the most advantages with the fewest disadvantages.

All this, you see, does not depend in any degree upon the tendency of
population to increase beyond the means of subsistence. It depends upon
nothing but what every working man must know: that if there were fewer
men, there would not be any men out of work; and that if there were no
men out of employment, the men who are in employment could make their
own terms with the capitalists.

II.—You say, that it would be better to take off the taxes than to
diminish the population.1 I too am desirous that the taxes should be
taken off: but if there were no taxes upon the working classes at all,
there would be as many men out of employment as before: although they
who are employed would be better off as long as their present wages
continued; but, as there would still be more labourers than could obtain
employment, the same process of bidding at lower wages against one
another would continue, and wages speedily be reduced again to the
lowest possible amount; reduced too, observe, by the competition of the
working people themselves. Besides, when a mode of benefiting the
working classes, viz. by limiting their numbers, is pointed out, it is
no answer to point to another mode of benefiting them, viz. by taking
off the taxes: for this, unfortunately, you have not yet in your power,
(and yet there is no reason why the people should be kept miserable in
the interim:) and besides, if you had, why not do both?

I cannot agree in the sentiments which you express in the following
sentence; “We do not wish men to be comfortable, if they could be so for
a period under a bad system.” [P. 705.] I do wish men to be comfortable,
whether under a bad system or a good one. What is it that constitutes a
bad system, if it is not the discomfort which it produces. Good
government is not the end of all human actions. Though a highly
important means, it is still only a means, to an end: and that end is
happiness.

I admit that I should desire for the people something more than merely
good clothing and plenty of food. But it remains to be shewn that their
chance of obtaining that something more, will be in any degree
diminished by their being well fed and clothed. I feel confident that it
will be increased. Until they are well fed, they cannot be well
instructed: and until they are well instructed, they cannot emancipate
themselves from the double yoke of priestcraft and of reverence for
superiors.

Edition: current; Page: [83]
Placed as is your observation, just quoted, among many others of similar
import, I cannot but view it as a sort of acknowledgment, that the
people would be made more comfortable by limiting their numbers. If
they, too, can be convinced of this, I have no fear of their hesitating
to adopt the means from apprehension of its retarding the epoch of a
Radical Reform.

A circumstance which appears to weigh with you, is, that you think the
plan of checking population a device of the rich to oppress the poor.
[P. 705.] So far is this from being the case, that it is entirely
contrary to the interests of the rich that any check to population
should come into general adoption.

It is the interest of the master manufacturers, that a great number of
hands should readily offer themselves at low wages. Now I have shewn,
that if the numbers of the people were limited to a sufficient degree,
wages would be high, and workmen could not always be readily obtained.

III.—You say, “Wages have decreased in England, in a ratio with the
accumulation of capital; not because there are too many labourers, but
because capital, being the ruling principle, can compel them to labour
upon its own conditions.” [P. 701.] It is true, that when the population
is excessive, the capitalist can lose nothing by dismissing him—that
another man, of equal bodily powers, will immediately offer himself at
the same, or even lower wages,—he is forced to cringe to his master, and
submit to any indignity rather than be turned out. If labourers were few
in comparison to the demand for them—if labour, and not employment for
labour, were the article in request:—if every working man knew that when
dismissed he could easily obtain employment, while his master could not
so readily obtain another labourer, he would then be as independent as
his employer.

Look at North America! Is the labourer there the slave of the
capitalist? You will say, this is owing to good government. To prove the
contrary, I refer you to the English colonies, to Nova Scotia, for
instance; and the English colonies are among the worst governed
countries in the universe. Yet in Nova Scotia the labourer is highly
paid, and perfectly independent; nor does any rich man dare to oppress
or insult him. This is only because there is a deficiency of labourers,
below the number which capitalists wish to employ.

In some parts of the south of France, the working people are well paid,
and well provided with necessaries and comforts. This I affirm from my
own observation.2 There however, population is regulated. Yet there the
government is not good. The same is the case is some parts of the
Austrian dominions, under one of the most despotic governments upon
record. In both these countries the people are kept, through the efforts
of bad government, in a state of great mental degradation, and
consequently unable to avail themselves of the advantages they Edition:
current; Page: [84] might otherwise possess, which in time they will
possess, and which the people of this country might almost immediately
possess.

Not only the master manufacturer but the landowner also, has an interest
in over-population. A large population implies a high state of
cultivation, and dear corn. Now a high price of corn is the cause of
high rents; an highly cultivated farm will yield an increased rent at
the expiration of the lease. Both sections of the rich—the landowners
and manufacturers—are thus interested in the excessive population; the
former for high rents; the latter for low wages, and high profits.

Nor is this all. Both landlords and manufacturers have an obvious
interest in keeping the working classes in a state of abject poverty.
These gentlemen know that while the great body of the people are
compelled to work fourteen hours a day, they cannot turn their attention
to the abuses of the government. They can neither instruct themselves,
nor send their children to be instructed. From want of leisure, their
thinking powers can never be sufficiently developed, to repel the
prejudices which make them the slaves of priests and kings.

So long as excess of population was regarded as an irremediable evil,
the doctrine was taken up and patronized by the aristocracy: who wished
the people to infer, that misgovernment was but a trivial evil, and that
it was idle to oppose it, since the lower classes must always be in
poverty, under a good, or under a bad government. But now that remedy is
pointed out, for excess of population; a remedy, which, if adopted,
would produce high wages, and would enable the people to instruct
themselves, and to reform their government; I venture to predict that
the rich, but above all, the clergy will do all in their power to
prevent the adoption of the plan, so well calculated to elevate the
scale of being. As soon as they shall perceive that it is coming into
use, they will rail against it in the pulpit, will persecute in every
possible way, and without mercy all whom they suspect to have made use
of it. But all their efforts will be useless; and if the superstitions
of the nursery are discarded, we may hope ere long to see the English
people well paid, well instructed, and eventually well governed.

IV.—I have only room to say a few words against the objection that this
plan is a violation of the laws of nature. [Pp. 700, 705.] Those laws
are no more violated by checking population than by any other mode of
turning to useful purposes the properties of matter. It is not in the
power of man, a being of limited faculties, to violate the laws of
nature. But he can avail himself of one law to counteract another. It is
a law of nature that the sexual intercourse, if not artificially
prevented, occasions the generation of children. But it is also a law of
nature, that man shall seek happiness; and that he shall avail himself,
for that purpose, of other laws of nature.

You say, in a former article; “With all due deference to those who wish
to keep down the population to the means of subsistence, I think this
might be very safely left to Providence which has spread so plentiful a
table for all his Edition: current; Page: [85] creatures:”3 and in a
later article; “We can trust the Ruler of all things, not only with ‘his
sky’ but all the principles which he has called into action, to regulate
themselves.”4

You do not trust the Almighty with “his sky.” You do not indeed prevent
the rain from falling at unseasonable times: the true reason of which I
take to be that you cannot. But you do all in your power to shelter
yourself from its fall: you put up an umbrella, and cover your house
with a roof, to prevent the rain, which Providence has sent, from
injuring your person or your property. The charge of violating the laws
of nature may thus be retorted upon yourself. To check population is not
more unnatural than to make use of an umbrella. If either of these
operations is a counteraction of the designs of Providence, both are
equally so. Again, when you speak of leaving to Providence the care of
checking population, you seem not to be aware of the length to which
this argument may be carried. A man who leaves every thing to
Providence, will not succeed in many of his undertakings. “God helps
those who help themselves:” and you might as well leave to Providence
the care of producing food, as that of preventing either the waste or
useless consumption of it.

A.M.


28.: QUESTION OF POPULATION [2]
 BLACK DWARF, 10 DEC., 1823, PP. 791-8

This is the second of Mill’s responses to the opinions of Thomas Wooler
(see No. 27). Wooler had replied to No. 27 in “The Black Dwarf to ‘A.M.’
against the Preventive System,” Black Dwarf, 3 Dec., 1823, pp. 772-83,
to which the interpolated page numbers refer. Headed “Question of
Population / Arguments of the Anti-Populationists,” the letter is
subheaded “To the Editor of the Black Dwarf,” and is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A second letter on the same subject which appeared in
the Black Dwarf of December 10th 1823, signed A.M.”

(MacMinn, p. 5).

sir,—

I have perused with attention your reply to my former letter on the plan
of regulating the numbers of the people; and I proceed to state the
reasons which induce me, notwithstanding all which you have said, to
adhere to my former opinion, that any increase of population beyond the
actual increase of the means of subsistence and employment, would be
highly injurious to the labouring classes, by whatever circumstances the
increase of the subsistence may be promoted or retarded.

Before replying, however, to your objections, I think it necessary to
correct Edition: current; Page: [86] two mistakes into which you have
fallen in your statement of my views. You observe, that it is not the
labourer alone who multiplies the candidates for labour; and you quote
the instances of Mr. T. Courtenay, and Mr. Canning.1 You then observe,
“It is only those who are poor, who are recommended to abstinence. A
class almost as numerous, namely, those who may become so, are never
taken into the calculation.” [P. 776.] Now, Sir, I have to remark, that
I do take into the calculation not only the poor, but all men; and I
think it highly unwise in any person, rich or poor, to have more than a
certain number of children. But I certainly think it still more unwise
in a poor man to have a family whom he cannot maintain, than in a rich
man to have a family which he can.

The other instance of misinterpretation to which I allude, is the
following:—You say, “you would be satisfied if the people could be made
comfortable under a bad system; and while no discomfort is actually
felt, you seem to infer that it ought not to be feared, no matter how
certain to result from a bad system.” [Pp. 777-8.] Now, Sir, on turning
to my former letter, I do, indeed, find these words: “I wish the people
to be comfortable under any system, good or bad;” but I also find the
following words: “I admit that I should desire something more for the
people than merely good clothing and plenty of food. But it rests with
you to prove, that their chance of obtaining that something more will be
in any degree diminished by their being well fed and clothed.”2 I also
avowed myself,3 and again avow myself, a friend to a Radical Reform in
the Commons House of Parliament. So much for my views and your
misinterpretations. I now proceed to comment upon your arguments.

You say that I have avoided the discussion of the question whether
population has ever pressed against the means of subsistence; and yet
you say this is the only ground upon which my arguments in favour of
keeping down the numbers of the people can be maintained. [P. 783.]

It may, perhaps, be necessary to inform you, that when population is
said to press against the means of subsistence, the meaning is, that it
presses against the means of employment; in short, that there are more
men in existence than can be employed and maintained, in comfort, by the
productive capital of the country. That such is the fact, is
sufficiently proved, by the universal prevalence of low wages.—There is
no country on the earth, if we except America and other newly cultivated
countries, where (if no check is in use) the labourer is not underpaid.
Now, I ask, how could this possibly be the case, if the population did
not press on the means of employment? If there had been fewer workmen
than the capital of the world is able to employ, the capitalists would
have found great difficulty in obtaining men; they would have been eager
to obtain them almost at any cost, Edition: current; Page: [87] and
would have bid against one another until wages were raised very high.
This, however, is very far from being the case. In every old country,
the lowest class of labourers are barely provided with the necessaries
of life. This could never be the case, if there were not more than the
capital of the country could employ; in consequence of which they bid
against one another, and obtain lower wages: nor can they all be
employed, even at a low rate, for many are constantly out of work. If
now they would adopt means for regulating their numbers, they would have
it in their power to make their own terms with their employers; for they
could always keep their number below that which can be employed with the
present capital. Labour would then always be in request, and wages high.

But you affirm (if I understand you rightly), that even in this case,
the employers could keep down wages. [P. 775.] I feel no such
apprehensions. The capitalists have been enabled, hitherto, to keep down
wages, only by the mutual competition of the labourers. Slaves are at
the mercy of their employers, and will be worked as it may suit the
convenience of those employers. They can be forced to work. Free
labourers cannot.

When there is no excess of population—no competition among the
labourers, they are not at the mercy of their employers. Among many
proofs of this fact which our history affords, I shall only quote one.
After the great plague, in the reign of Edward III, by which the numbers
of the people were greatly reduced, complaints were made of a deficiency
of workmen, and it was found that they would no longer work without high
wages. On this an Act of Parliament was made to prohibit them from
taking higher wages than they took before the plague: this Act being
found ineffectual, the penalties were raised higher and higher, until,
at last, the offence was made capital; and still it was all in vain.4 A
Edition: current; Page: [88] striking proof of the disposition of the
higher classes to keep down wages, but an equally striking proof of
their inability to do so. It may serve as an answer to your assertion,
that if half the population of Ireland were cut off by a pestilence, the
remainder would not be benefited. I think it very clear that they would
be benefited; as the English people were benefited by the plague in the
time of Edward III.

I have your own authority, to corroborate my assertion,5 that it is the
competition of the labourers which enables their employers to keep down
wages. You say

no labour was ever long profitable to the labourer in this country. All
sorts of labour, at the same period, cannot be so, particularly in
manufactures; the demand for which is influenced by fashions; and the
labourer must eat or starve as fashion pleases. When a trade is supposed
to be profitable, a rush is made on the part of the rising population to
partake of its advantages. This destroys them. Another is rising and the
crowd turns in that direction.

[P. 782.]

Is it not clear, from your own statement, that if the “rising
population” were not so numerous—if the “crowd” were smaller, their
“rush” to partake of high wages would not, as at present, have the
effect of lowering those high wages? Is it possible to admit more
explicitly than you do, that the lowness of wages is owing to the
competition among the people, from which it is a necessary inference,
that if the people were less numerous, the competition would be much
smaller, and wages would not be so much reduced?

I do not think it necessary to reply to any of the arguments which you
have adduced to show that this “check to population”6 would not have the
effect of checking population. Whatever other objections may be urged
against it, this, at least, is a merit which certainly must be allowed
to it. I do not see how you can well doubt that if the people could be
prevailed upon to use the method of keeping down their numbers, they
would infallibly succeed.

You endeavour to shew that I am wrong in asserting that it is the
interest of the landowners and manufacturers, that the country should be
over-peopled;7 you do not, however, deny, either that low wages are
favourable to the manufacturer, or high rents to the landlord: and it is
clear that when there are many mouths to feed, a high state of
cultivation is required, which implies dear corn, and high rents.
Edition: current; Page: [89] Your only argument is, that Dennis Browne
says, that Ireland could spare two millions of its inhabitants.8 Now I
cannot hold it to be any proof, that some thousands of men will not see
and act according to their interest, because one man, and he, not one of
the wisest, either does not see it, or seeing it, affects to preach
against it. But without pushing this argument farther, I admit that
Ireland is rather too much over-peopled, even for the aristocracy; for
their own persons and property are endangered by the despair of a
starving people.

You still think that the people will not effect reform until they are
driven to desperation by poverty; and you quote the apathy and
indifference of the middle classes. [P. 773.] I might quote the apathy
and indifference of the agricultural labourers, who are by far the
poorest of the working people. Notwithstanding all that you have said, I
really cannot admit that the middling classes of this country are more
indifferent than the working classes to the blessings of good
government; and I am sure that in every other country of Europe the
middle classes alone feel any desire for a better government than they
possess.

As to the condition of the people in the South of France, and in the
Austrian States, you do not deny the truth of my statement, that they
regulate their numbers, and that they are well paid and comfortable.9
But you say they are in a state of great mental degradation. [P. 779.]
This is true. But who ever asserted, that superstition and
mis-government will not brutalize a people? They are the slaves of the
priests; and, moreover, the Government, which knows what it has to fear
from their mental improvement, discourages the introduction of schools
and other means of instruction among them. Our working classes are, by
no means, equally priest-ridden, and have much greater facilities for
instructing themselves.—You say, “it remains to be proved, that until
men are well fed they cannot be well instructed.” [P. 778.] In support
of which you quote Shakspeare, rather an extraordinary authority in a
question of philosophy. I reply, that if fat paunches make lean pates;10
still it is not the less true, that so long as men stand in need of all
the money which they can command, to secure a bare subsistence, they are
not likely to spend much, either upon books or upon the instruction of
their children. Nor is this all. A man who is compelled to work fourteen
hours out of the twenty-four to obtain bread, has no time to instruct
himself, and is too much harassed and fatigued to turn his attention to
important affairs. How can it be otherwise?

A few words more on the specific plan which has been proposed for the
regulation of population. You see in it a tendency to moral evils of the
most aggravated description; and you insinuate, that it would lead to
infanticide, and Edition: current; Page: [90] even to murder. [P. 780.]
You might as well say, that to give true evidence before a Court of
Justice, might lead to perjury; that to write your name would lead to
forgery; or, in fact, that any useful act might terminate in any
mischievous one, if some insignificant collateral circumstance is, in
both cases, the same. This looks very like a reason made to justify a
feeling. Can you discover any but a fantastic resemblance between
checking population, and committing murder? Do you think, that what
deters people from committing murder, is an aversion to reduce the
population of the country? for this is the only deterring motive, which
would be removed by checking population. As to infanticide, I leave you
to judge, whether a parent, who has a larger family than it is possible
to maintain, or a parent who has only a small family, is most likely to
be tempted to destroy a child. I thus retort upon yourself your remark,
that men should keep as far as possible from the temptation to commit
any crime. [P. 780.]

In my last letter, I replied to the objection, that to check population
is to violate the laws of nature, by observing that it is equally a
violation of the law of nature to hold up an umbrella.11 This you deny;
and you say “I am no party to the operation of the law; and I cannot
violate it. The law is, that rain should descend; and I only avoid its
descending upon my own head.” [P. 782.] The law is, that rain shall
descend upon every man’s head, and every where. But if you do not like
this illustration, I will give you another. It is a law of nature that
man should go naked. He is born naked; like other animals, all of whom
go naked. To put on clothes is clearly a counteraction of the designs of
Providence, if Providence intended that we should not violate the laws
of nature. Accordingly, upon this principle, some self-called
philosophers have written in defence of the savage state, and have
exclaimed against every step in the progress of civilization as being an
infraction of the laws of nature.

You also say that there is “a great difference between the different
laws of nature: and that you do not suspect me of asserting that you
have an equal right to hold up an umbrella, and to procure abortion, or
to kill a fellow creature.” [P. 782.] This is precisely what I want. You
have now brought your doctrines to the same test with myself. I too,
affirm, that “there is a great difference between different laws of
nature.” The difference is this, there are two sets of actions both of
which you chuse to call violations of the law of nature. By the one set
misery is inflicted, by the other set, no evil whatever is occasioned.
Thus by killing a fellow-creature, pain is inflicted on the murdered
person and his connexions, and other persons are alarmed for their own
safety. By checking population, no pain is inflicted, no alarm excited,
no security infringed. It cannot, therefore, on any principles, be
termed immoral; and if the above arguments be correct—if it tends to
elevate the working people from poverty and ignorance to affluence and
Edition: current; Page: [91] instruction, I am compelled to regard it as
highly moral and virtuous; nor can I agree with you in treating as
“heartless,” [p. 781] the desire of seeing so inestimable a benefit
conferred upon mankind; unless, indeed, the word heartless, be one of
the engines of a sentimental cant, invented to discourage all steady
pursuit of the general happiness of mankind.

A.M.


29.: PLACE’S ON THE LAW OF LIBEL
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 1 JAN., 1824, P. 2

This review deals with a subject that occupied much of James Mill’s
attention. The anonymous pamphlet (by Francis Place, as Mill certainly
knew) is made up of eight parts published in the British Luminary and
Weekly Intelligencer in weekly first-page, unsigned instalments from 3
Nov. to 22 Dec., 1822, under the title “Constitutional Association.
Practice of the Courts.—Trial by Jury in Libel Cases,” plus an article
added for the pamphlet publication. Francis Place (1771-1854), “the
Radical tailor of Charing Cross,” was a loyal associate of Bentham and
James Mill, and championed popular causes throughout his life. Mill
again reviewed Place’s pamphlet (with Richard Mence’s The Law of Libel)
in “Law of Libel and Liberty of the Press,” Westminster Review, III
(Apr. 1825), 285-321 (CW, Vol. XXI, pp. 1-34). The unsigned review in
the Morning Chronicle is headed “On the Law of Libel, with Strictures on
the Self-Styled Constitutional Association, pp. 73. London, John Hunt,
1823” and is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A review of Place’s
pamphlet on the Law of Libel which appeared in the Chronicle of January
1st 1824”

(MacMinn, p. 5).

this pamphlet consists of a series of Essays, all of which, except the
last, appeared some months ago in a periodical publication. We recommend
it strongly to the attentive perusal of every one who desires to know
the extent of that boasted liberty of the press, which, we are taught to
believe, is the birthright of Englishmen. He will learn from this
pamphlet, that the rulers of this country possess as great a power of
suppressing obnoxious publications by fine and imprisonment as they can
desire: that the comparative free discussion which we enjoy exists only
by connivance, and would not exist at all, were it not forced upon the
Government by an enlightened public opinion.

A short abstract will convey a better idea, than any general remarks, of
the view taken of the subject in this very able production.

There is no statute law on the subject of libel. There is nothing but
common or unwritten law. Where the law is unwritten, definition is
evidently impossible; much more, accurate and precise definition. What
is to be gathered from precedents and cases can be known only to
lawyers. Jurymen are not lawyers. They cannot therefore judge for
themselves whether a publication is or is not libellous, but are
compelled to decide the one way or the other, according to the
directions of the Judge. Now, the Judge, in giving these directions, not
only is Edition: current; Page: [92] not restrained by any definition of
libel, but is not even restrained by precedents and cases; since there
is scarcely a single point of law, on both sides of which many decisions
are not to be found. Whether then the Judge shall direct the Jury to
decide according to the precedents on one side, or according to the
precedents on the other, depends almost entirely upon his own good will
and pleasure. The law of libel, therefore, is actually and in fact made
by the Judge.

When a person is tried for publishing a libel, some one swears that he
has purchased a book, and the Judge tells the Jury that he considers it
to be a libel. But does the Judge tell the Jury what a libel is? No; for
there is no definition of it. If, therefore, the Jury find the prisoner
guilty, it is not upon the testimony of witnesses, but upon the
authority of the Judge. The witness swears that the prisoner sold the
book; but to sell a book is not punishable, unless that book is a libel.
For the fact of its being so, the Jury have nothing but the word of the
Judge. The latitude which Judges allow themselves in declaring
publications to be libellous, may be judged of by the example of the
late Lord Ellenborough, who said that a libel was any thing which hurts
the feelings of any body.1 Under this definition, if it be one, it is
easy to see that all publications disagreeable to the Government may be
included. The only legal check, then, upon the Judge, is the disposition
of the Jury to set aside his opinion, and refuse to consign a man to
imprisonment and fine, merely upon the faith of the Judge’s opinion. But
there is a mode of rendering this check equally nugatory with all
others, and this mode is constantly resorted to in cases of libel. It is
by employing a packed Special Jury. The pamphlet before us contains the
most complete exposure in the smallest compass which we have yet seen,
of the packing system.2 It investigates the origin of the practice,
demonstrates that it was originally an abuse, that the grounds on which
it was professedly introduced, have long since ceased to exist, and that
Special Jurymen, far from being, as in theory they ought to be, superior
in education and respectability to the Common Juries, are for the most
part greatly deficient in both. It also explains the mode in which the
system is acted upon at present. The Special Jury list is composed in
counties, of freeholders; and in Middlesex, of some descriptions of
leaseholders also; in London, it consists of all whom it is thought
proper to term merchants. From this list, the Jury is selected; in
Middlesex and London, by the Master of the Crown Office, who names
forty-eight persons, twelve of whom form the Special Jury. It is
Edition: current; Page: [93] proved in this pamphlet, from indisputable
authority, that the Juries are constantly selected out of a certain very
small number of persons known to the selector, who make it a regular
trade; and as each receives a guinea for every cause he decides, we
leave it to the reader to judge how often he will return a verdict
contrary to the will of his employers, knowing well that if he does so,
he will be summoned no more.

Since the publication of the bulk of these Essays in The British
Luminary, the subject of Special Juries has been brought before the
House of Commons; and the facts stated above were met by protestations
of the unblemished integrity of Mr. Lushington, the present Master of
the Crown Office.3 This, it is to be observed, is the constant practice
of all the defenders of abuses; they always endeavour to turn a public
into a personal question; to confound attacks upon a system, with
attacks upon the character of individuals. We will not merely say that
the administration of justice ought not only to be pure, but
unsuspected, and that suspicion of injustice is an evil, second only in
magnitude to injustice itself: we will not content ourselves with
saying, that if Mr. Lushington be a man of honour, future Masters of the
Crown Office may be otherwise. We will not confine ourselves to these
arguments, though these, were there no others, would be conclusive. We
cannot sufficiently reprobate the principle itself, of endeavouring to
deter men from exposing a bad system, lest their strictures should be
construed into imputations upon the character of individuals.

We assert, that, if a public officer is placed in a situation where his
employers will expect him to serve them at the expence of the
public—where he must content them or forfeit his subsistence, evil
cannot fail to ensue. We are told, in reply, that Mr. Lushington is a
pure, a virtuous, an honourable man, and the upshot of the whole is,
that we are to surrender up our liberty and our property into the hands
of this honourable man; that we are to trust him with a power over us,
which no man could, consistently with prudence, confide to his own
brother. We give Mr. Lushington full credit for as much virtue as falls
to the share of any other man.—But we confess, we think it rather too
much for Mr. Lushington’s friends, in his behalf, to lay claim to more,
and to think him insulted if the public does not acquiesce in this
modest claim. Really, one would think, to hear this language, that a
preference of their private interest to that of the community, were
something totally unheard of in public men; and that there were no
instances of persons who have acquitted themselves admirably well of the
ordinary duties of life, but who, nevertheless, when their subsistence
depended upon their becoming instruments of misgovernment, have easily
persuaded Edition: current; Page: [94] themselves that it was their duty
to do so. We do not blame Mr. Lushington for doing what every man in his
situation would do: but we cannot help reminding his overwarm
supporters, that for men to strain every nerve for the attainment and
preservation of power, which never can be desired for any good purpose,
is not the conduct of all others best calculated to raise an
expectation, that if allowed to retain it they will not make a bad use
of it.

If they could prove that Mr. Lushington cannot abuse his power, they
would not take so much pains to prove that he will not. But we are to
believe that the situation holds out temptations against which no virtue
would be proof, save his who actually holds the situation. Another
succeeds him; that other is equally immaculate. By this argument, if
such it can be called, no abuse would ever be reformed: for there must
always be some one in a situation to profit by it; and if the honour of
one man is a sufficient guarantee against abuse, it were an affront to
suppose that the honour of another was inferior. What tyranny, what
oppression, might not be justified in this way? You dare not accuse the
man; and if you accuse the system, you are met with protestations that
the man is perfectly immaculate.

Where has Mr. Lushington given proofs of such exalted heroism? It is
easy to ascertain whether he prefers the public interest to his own, for
if so, his salary still remains untouched in the Exchequer. But there is
no need of surmises, when facts are before us. Let us look to the list
of those who have served on Special Juries for the last ten years:—Let
us ask ourselves how it happens that the same small number of men have
been always summoned?4 What Judge would listen to attestations of
character, when he has positive evidence before him? Nay, the very
circumstance of Mr. Lushington’s still remaining Master of the Crown
Office, is in itself a sufficient proof that his conduct has been
conformable to the interests of his employers: unless Ministers also lay
claim to the same super-human virtue for which we are to give credit to
Mr. Lushington?

It is probable that this gentleman sincerely believes the custom of
packing juries to be right; at all events, we are sure, that he never
would set up for himself the same lofty pretensions which are set up for
him by his over officious friends; that he desires to be judged by his
actions, not by the allegations of his friends as to his character; and
that, if he is wise, he wishes for nothing more strongly than to be
relieved from a duty which it is scarcely possible to execute without
incurring a degree of odium, which, we have no reason to believe, that
he personally deserves.

Edition: current; Page: [95]


30.: PLEADINGS
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 5 JAN., 1824, P. 3

This letter, using one of Bentham’s catch-phrases as signature, is in
response to a letter, headed “Pleadings” and signed “Hibernicus,”
Morning Chronicle, 3 Jan., 1824, p. 3, which is a rebuttal of another
letter headed “Pleadings,” signed “G.J.G. Gray’s Inn,” ibid., 26 Dec.,
1823, p. 4. Headed as title, subheaded “To the Editor of the Morning
Chronicle,” the item is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A short
letter on Indictments, signed an Enemy to Legal Fictions, whch. appeared
in the Chronicle of January 5th 1824”

(MacMinn, p. 5).

sir,—

In answer to the letter which you inserted some days ago on the subject
of Pleadings, your Correspondent, Hibernicus, observes, that it is
incorrect to affirm the Grand Jury to be perjurers, when they return
upon oath that the prisoner is guilty; because, in fact, all which they
mean is, not that he is guilty, but that a prima facie case is made out
against him. I, too, have read the letter on Pleadings, and I am sure
that the writer agrees with Hibernicus on this subject. All which he
intended was, to shew the absurdity of a system of law which forces the
Grand Jury to say one thing when they mean another; and not only to say
it, but to swear it. This is innocent perjury, but it is perjury, and
though the Jurors do not deserve blame, the law evidently does.

An Enemy to Legal Fictions


31.: QUESTION OF POPULATION [3]
 BLACK DWARF, 7 JAN., 1824, PP. 21-3

For the context of this third response to Thomas Wooler, see No. 27.
Wooler had replied to No. 28 with “The Black Dwarf to A.M.,” Black
Dwarf, 31 Dec., 1823, pp. 905-10, to which the interpolated page numbers
refer. The letter by another correspondent that Mill refers to in the
opening and penultimate paragraphs immediately precedes Mill’s own
letter; headed “Question of Population,” and signed “A Friend to the
‘Lower Classes,’ ” it appears on pp. 15-21 of the issue for 7 Jan. How
Mill became aware of its existence is not known. Mill’s letter is headed
as title, subheaded “To the Editor of the Black Dwarf,” and described in
his bibliography as “A third letter on the necessity of checking
population whch. appeared in the Black Dwarf of January 9th [sic] 1824,
signed A.M.”

(MacMinn, p. 5).

sir,—

I shall not extend my remarks on your last letter to any great length,
as I know that you have on hand another letter on the same subject,
which will probably consider the question as you wish it to be
considered, with reference to the relative powers of increase possessed
by population and subsistence.

Edition: current; Page: [96]
I shall only at present remark, that you have made a much more free use,
in this paper, of that easy figure of speech called assertion, than of
that more intractable one called proof. With reference indeed to the
laws of nature, you have, I am pleased to see, given up the point; for
although you still dislike the remedy which I propose, you observe, “if
it can be proved necessary to check population at all, your means may be
the best, and therefore may be tolerated.” [P. 909.] At this also I am
well pleased. But you maintain that if three-fourths of the inhabitants
of Ireland were to be swept off, and the remainder were sufficient to do
all the work required by the rich, the price of labour would not
advance. This seems to me rather an extraordinary assertion. First, it
supposes a case which can never happen. One-fourth of the Irish
population could not possibly do all the work required by the rich, as
the whole population does now.* In the next place, I can safely appeal
to the experience of every working man (as well as to the reason of the
case), whether, if three out of every four of his competitors were
removed, he would not feel a very sensible addition to his wages. You
admit that if the population is greatly reduced by a plague, wages will
rise. [Pp. 907-8.] Surely then, if it is reduced by means less shocking
to humanity than a plague, the effect will be the same.

You observe that it is neither wise nor politic to consider “whether a
family of two or ten children, were more convenient to the individual,
since such matters will always regulate themselves.” [P. 905.] This,
Sir, is all that I want. I am far from wishing to regulate population by
law, or by compulsion in any shape. I am aware that it will, and I think
that it ought, to regulate itself: but you forget that it cannot
regulate itself unless the means are known; a man cannot accommodate the
numbers of his family to his means of supporting it, unless he knows how
to limit those numbers; for I have no belief in the efficacy of Mr.
Malthus’s moral check,1 so long as the great mass of the people are so
uneducated as they are at present. Therefore I think it highly desirable
that the physical check should be known to the people; and I agree with
you that each man will then be the best judge of his own convenience.

I consider the question to be practically decided by this admission. If
you allow that such things ought to regulate themselves, you cannot
consistently object to the diffusion among the people of any information
calculated to throw light upon the subject. Nevertheless, if you
challenge me to the discussion of the other question, whether population
has a tendency to increase faster than subsistence, I am perfectly ready
to discuss this question also, when I shall have Edition: current; Page:
[97] perused the arguments of your other correspondent, and such remarks
as you may think proper to make upon those arguments.

At present I shall trouble you with very few words more, in answer to
another of your observations. I consider it a mere play upon words, to
say, as you have done, that labour is capital. [P. 907.] Capital is that
portion of the annual produce which is set apart for the maintenance of
productive labour. Capital, you say, might be made to increase faster
than at present. I admit that for a limited time it might; but capital
can only be increased from savings. Would you, then, force accumulation?
Would you have sumptuary laws? When you shall have answered this
question, whether in the negative or in the affirmative, the basis of
the discussion will be narrowed, and I shall know what arguments to put
forward, among the many which bear upon the case.

A.M.


32.: JAMES MILL ON THE QUESTION OF POPULATION
 BLACK DWARF, 25 FEB., 1824, PP. 238-44

For the context of this final letter in Mill’s series (Nos. 27, 28, and
31) in response to Thomas Wooler, see No. 27. Wooler’s response to No.
31, “Further Inquiry into the Principles of Population,” Black Dwarf, 4
Feb., 1824, pp. 143-9, is here answered by Mill with his strongest
weapon, an extensive extract (pp. 260-1) from James Mill’s “Colony”
(1818), written for the Supplement to the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth
Editions of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. III, pp. 257-73. Because
J.S. Mill says his father’s comment is in effect his own reply to
Wooler, the extract is here included, with Wooler’s editorial notes in
reply. Headed “Question on [sic] Population Resumed,” with a subhead,
“To the Editor,” the letter is not in Mill’s bibliography, but its
signature (“A.M.”) and contents leave no doubt that it is Mill’s.

sir,—

The accompanying paragraphs are destined for insertion in your Dwarf.
They are extracted from the article “Colonies,” in the supplement to the
Encyclopaedia Britannica; a discourse composed by an eminent friend of
the people. They contain, I think, a most conclusive answer to your last
article on population; and if you insert them, you will be very well
able to dispense with the reply which you would otherwise have received
from

Sir, your most obedient servant,

A.M.

It should be very distinctly understood what it is we mean, when we say,
in regard to such a country as Great Britain, for example, that the
supply of food is too small for the population. Because it may be said
immediately, that the quantity of food may be increased in Great
Britain; a proposition which no man will think of denying.

On this proposition, let us suppose, that in any given year, this year
for example, the food in Great Britain is too small for the people, by
10,000 individuals. It is, no doubt, true, that additional food,
sufficient to supply 10,000 individuals, might be raised next Edition:
current; Page: [98] year; but where would be the amelioration, if 10,000
individuals were, at the same time, added to the numbers to be fed?*
Now, the tendency of population is such as to make, in almost all cases,
the real state of the facts correspond with this supposition. Population
not only rises to the level of the present supply of food; but, if you
go on every year increasing the quantity of food, population goes on
increasing at the same time, and so fast, that the food is commonly
still too small for the people. This is the grand proposition of Mr.
Malthus’s book: it is not only quite original, but it is that point of
the subject from which all the more important consequences
flow,—consequences which, till that point was made known, could not be
understood.†

When we say that the quantity of food, in any country, is too small for
the quantity of the people, and that, though we may increase the
quantity of food, the population will, at the same time, increase so
fast, that the food will still be too small for the people; we may be
encountered with another proposition. It may be said, that we may
increase food still faster than it is possible to increase population.
And there are situations in which we must allow that the proposition is
true.

In countries newly inhabited, or in which there is a small number of
people, there is commonly a quantity of land yielding a large produce
for a given portion of labour. So long as the land continues to yield in
this liberal manner, how fast soever population increases, food may
increase with equal rapidity, and plenty remain. When population,
however, has increased to a certain extent, all the best land is
occupied; if it increases any farther, land of a worse quality must be
taken in hand; when land of the next best quality is all exhausted, land
of a still inferior quality must be employed, till at last you come to
that which is exceedingly barren. In this progression, it is very
evident, that it is always gradually becoming more and more difficult to
make food increase, with any given degree of rapidity, and that you must
come, at last, to a point, where it is altogether impossible.‡

It may, however, be said, and has been said in substance, though not
very clearly, by some of Mr. Malthus’s opponents, that it is improper to
speak of food as too small for the population, so long as food can be
made to increase at an equal pace with population; and though it is no
doubt true, that, in the states of modern Europe, food does not actually
increase so fast as the population endeavours to increase, and hence the
poverty and wretchedness of that population; yet it would be very
possible to make food increase as fast as the tendency of population,
and hence to make the people happy without diminishing their numbers by
colonization; and that it is owing wholly to unfavourable, to
ill-contrived institutions, that such is not the effect universally
experienced. As this Edition: current; Page: [99] observation has in it
a remarkable combination of truth and error, it is worthy of a little
pains to make the separation.§

There can be no doubt that, by employing next year a greater proportion
of the people upon the land than this year, we should raise a greater
quantity of food; by employing a still greater proportion the year
following, we should produce a still greater quantity of food: and, in
this way, it would be possible to go on for some time, increasing food
as fast as it would be possible for the population to increase. But
observe at what cost this would be. As the land, in this course, yields
gradually less and less, to every new portion of labour bestowed upon
it, it would be necessary to employ gradually not only a greater and
greater number, but a greater and greater proportion of the people in
raising food. But the greater the proportion of the people which is
employed in raising food, the smaller is the proportion which can be
employed in producing any thing else. You can only, therefore, increase
the quantity of food to meet the demand of an increasing population, by
diminishing the supply of those other things which minister to human
desires.¶

There can be no doubt, that, by increasing every year the proportion of
the population which you employ in raising food, and diminishing every
year the proportion employed in everything else, you may go on
increasing food as fast as population increases, till the labour of a
man, added upon the land, is just sufficient to add as much to the
produce, as will maintain himself and raise a family. Suppose, where the
principle of population is free from all restriction, the average number
of children reared in a family is five; in that case, so long as the
man’s labour, added to the labour already employed upon the land, can
produce food sufficient for himself and the rearing of five children,
food may be made to keep pace with population. But if things were made
to go on in such an order, till they arrived at that pass, men would
have food, but they would have nothing else. They would have neither
clothes, nor houses, nor furniture. There would be nothing for elegance,
nothing for ease, nothing for pleasure. There would be no class exempt
from the necessity of perpetual labour, by whom knowledge might be
cultivated, and discoveries useful to mankind.∥

It is of no use, then, to tell us that we have the physical power of
increasing food as fast as population. As soon as we have arrived at
that point at which the due distribution of the population is made
between those who raise food, and those who are in other ways employed
in contributing to the well-being of the members of the community, any
increase of the food, faster than is consistent with that distribution,
can only be made at the expense of those other things, by the enjoyment
of which the life of man is preferable to that of the brutes. At this
point the progress of population ought to be restrained. Population may
still increase, because the quantity of food may still be capable of
being Edition: current; Page: [100] increased, though not beyond a
certain slowness of rate, without requiring, to the production of it, a
greater than the due proportion of the population.

Suppose, then, when the due proportion of the population is allotted to
the raising of food, and the due proportion to other desirable
occupations, that the institutions of society were such as to prevent a
greater proportion from being withdrawn from these occupations to the
raising of food. This it would, surely, be very desirable that they
should effect. What now would be the consequence, should population, in
that case, go on at its full rate of increase,—in other words, faster
than with that distribution of the population, it would be possible for
food to be increased? The answer is abundantly plain: all those effects
would take place which have already been described as following upon the
existence of a redundant population in modern Europe, and in all
countries in which the great body of those who have nothing to give for
food but labour, are free labourers;—that is to say, wages would fall,
poverty would overspread the population, and all those horrid phenomena
would exhibit themselves which are the never-failing attendants on a
poor population.

It is of no great importance, though the institutions of society may be
such as to make the proportion of the population, kept back from the
providing of food, rather greater than it might be. All that happens is,
that the redundancy of population begins a little earlier. The
unrestrained progress of population would soon have added the deficient
number to the proportion employed in the raising of food; and, at
whatever point the redundancy begins, the effects are always the same.**

What are the best means of checking the progress of population, when it
cannot go on unrestrained, without producing one or other of two most
undesirable effects; either drawing an undue proportion of the
population to the mere raising of food, or producing poverty and
wretchedness, it is not now the place to inquire.

It is, indeed, the most important practical problem to which the wisdom
of the politician and moralist can be applied. It has, till this time,
been miserably evaded by all those who have meddled with the subject, as
well as by all those who were called upon, by their situation, to find a
remedy for the evils to which it relates. And yet, if the superstitions
of the nursery were discarded, and the principle of utility kept
steadily in view, a solution might not be very difficult to be found;
and the means of drying up one of the most copious sources of human
evil, a source which, if all other sources of evil were taken away,
would alone suffice to retain the great mass of human beings in misery,
might be seen to be neither doubtful nor difficult to be applied.††


33.: EFFECTS OF PERIODICAL LITERATURE
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 27 DEC., 1824, P. 3

In this letter Mill quotes from the article “Periodical Literature:
Edinburgh Review,” by James Mill, Westminster Review, I (Jan. 1824),
206-68, and defends it against a misinterpretation in an unheaded leader
in the Morning Chronicle, 16 Dec., 1824, p. 2. Edition: current; Page:
[101] The personal tone in the references to the editor are not pro
forma, being addressed to John Black (1783-1855), at this time closely
allied to James Mill, who constantly advised him on political matters.
The letter is headed “Periodical Literature. / To the Editor of the
Morning Chronicle.” There are several indications that this letter
corresponds to the entry in Mill’s bibliography, unidentified by
MacMinn, which reads “A short letter on [] which appeared in the Morning
Chronicle of 1824” (MacMinn, p. 6): the signature “A.B.” favoured by
Mill, the personal interest, and the use of Benthamite phraseology. The
cryptic entry appears in the bibliography between items dated October
1824 and January 1825.

sir,—

In your paper of this day (Thursday, Dec. 16th), you controvert certain
opinions relative to the probable tendency and effects of Periodical
Literature, which were propounded in the first number of the Westminster
Review. And you bring forward the inestimable service which you have
yourself rendered to mankind by criticizing the conduct of the unpaid
magistracy, as an instance of the beneficial effects which sometimes
arise from periodical literature.

Now, Sir, you must have interpreted the words of the writer in the
Westminster Review in a very different sense from that in which I
understand them, if you suppose that he meant to affirm that periodical
literature can never be productive of good. His object, as it seems to
me, was to point out the motives (hitherto little attended to) which
tend to draw the periodical writer out of the path of utility; motives
so strong that he did not merely go too far in characterizing them as a
sort of necessity; an inducement which generally operates as necessity.

That it is possible for a periodical writer to pursue steadily the
greatest good of the greatest number, you, Sir, afford a striking
example. But this is no more than the Westminster Reviewer has himself
acknowledged, in a passage, which, taking the view which you have done
of the article, you ought, I think, in fairness to have quoted.

One word of a personal nature seems to be required. We have described
the interests which operate to withdraw periodical writers from the line
of utility, and we have represented it as nearly impossible for them to
keep true to it. What! Are we, it may be asked, superior to seducements
to which all other men succumb? If periodical writing is by its nature
so imbued with evil, why is it that we propose to add to the supply of a
noxious commodity? Do we promise to keep out the poison which all other
men yield to the temptation of putting in? If we made such a pretension,
our countrymen would do right in laughing it to scorn; and we hope they
would not fail to adopt so proper a course. We have no claim to be
trusted any more than any one among our contemporaries; but we have a
claim to be tried. Men have diversities of taste; and it is not
impossible that a man should exist who really has a taste for the
establishment of securities for good government, and would derive more
pleasure from the success of this pursuit, than of any other pursuit in
which he could engage, wealth or power not excepted. All that we desire
is, that it may not be reckoned impossible that we may belong to a class
of this description.

There is another motive, as selfish as that which we ascribe to any
body, by which we may be actuated. We may be sanguine enough, or silly
enough, or clear-sighted enough, Edition: current; Page: [102] to
believe, that intellectual and moral qualities have made a great
progress among the people of this country; and that the class who will
really approve endeavours in favour of good government, and of the
happiness and intelligence of men, are a class sufficiently numerous to
reward our endeavours.

[P. 222.]

Even had there been no such passage as the foregoing, the very
circumstance that the work which thus criticises periodical
publications, is itself a periodical publication, might have convinced
you, that in ascribing to periodical works a tendency to advocate false
and mischievous, rather than true and important opinions, it spoke of
the general rule, not of the particular exceptions—of the motives which
act upon all mankind, not of those which may govern particular
individuals.

I have been induced to trouble you with these few words, because I
regretted that two such efficient friends of mankind, as the writer in
the Westminster Review and yourself, should appear to be at variance,
when I am persuaded that they really agree.

A.B.

Edition: current; Page: [103]


September 1825 to October 1828


34.: ABSENTEEISM
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 16 SEPT., 1825, P. 3

The letter, dated 15 Sept. (with an additional paragraph oddly inserted
in a leading article, Morning Chronicle, 22 Sept., 1825, p. 2), responds
to two leading articles in the Morning Chronicle, 7 Sept., p. 2, and 14
Sept., p. 2 (and probably also to “Absenteeism,” a letter signed “A,”
that appeared in the Morning Chronicle, 12 Sept., p. 4), all critical of
John Ramsay McCulloch’s evidence in “Fourth Report from the Select
Committee Appointed to Inquire into the State of Ireland,” PP, 1825,
VIII, 807-38. McCulloch (1789-1864), the Scottish economist and
statistician, was closely allied to the Philosophic Radicals at this
time. Headed as title, subheaded “To the Editor of the Morning
Chronicle,” the letter is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A letter
on Absenteeism, signed J.S. which appeared in the Chronicle of 16
September 1825” (MacMinn, p. 7); the additional paragraph is not there
mentioned.

sir,—

In several of your recent Papers you have combated the opinion expressed
by Mr. M’Culloch in his evidence, concerning the effect of the
expenditure of Irish absentees on the prosperity of that country from
which their incomes are drawn.1 As I agree almost in every particular
with Mr. M’Culloch, and think that the arguments which you have urged
against him are fallacious, and that the notions which they inculcate
are as pernicious as they are, unhappily, common, I submit to your
well-known candour the following statement of my reasons for dissenting
from your conclusion.

The income of a landlord, like any other income, may be expended in two
ways; in the hiring of labourers, or, in the purchase of commodities. In
point of fact, it is expended partly in the former way, and partly in
the latter; but in one or other of these ways it must be expended, if it
be expended at all, unless, indeed, it were given away.

Now I admit that in so far as the income of the landlord is expended in
the hiring of labourers, whether these are employed in building a house,
in digging a garden, in making or keeping a park, in shooting Catholics
or poachers, in washing dishes, or in blacking shoes; to that extent it
does give employment to a certain number of persons who would be thrown
out of employment if the landlord were to go abroad, and consequently
tends to keep wages somewhat higher, or to enable a somewhat larger
population to be maintained at the same Edition: current; Page: [104]
wages, than would be the case if he were to live in London or Paris, and
employ English or French labourers for the above purposes, instead of
Irish.

What I do not admit is, that (in so far as his income is expended, not
in the hiring of labourers, but in the purchase of commodities,) it has
the slightest tendency to keep wages higher, or to give employment to as
much as one labourer more, than if he were living at the antipodes: nor
do I believe that (in so far as this part of his expenditure is
concerned) as much as one man would be thrown out of employment, if
every resident landlord in the island were to go abroad, or to send
abroad for every article which he had a mind to consume.

If the landlord remained in Ireland, he would (we shall suppose) eat
Irish bread and beef, wear Irish shirts and breeches, sit on Irish
chairs, and drink his wine off an Irish table. Now, then, I will put a
case:—Suppose that he goes to London, leaving directions behind him that
all the bread and beef which he would have eaten, all the shirts and
breeches which he would have worn, all the chairs which he would have
sat upon, and all the tables off which he would have drank his wine,
should be regularly sent to him in London. You will not deny, I suppose,
that he would give just as much employment to Irish labour as if he had
consumed all these articles in the true orthodox way, close to the doors
of the very people who produced them.

It would puzzle you, I think, to discover any error in this proposition,
or to shew any difference which it can make to the Irish producers,
provided they supply the commodities, whether they are consumed on the
spot, or at a thousand miles distance. I would advise you to ponder
well, however, before you admit this; since you will find, if you do
admit it, that you have conceded the whole question.

In fact, this case, which I have put as an imaginary one, exactly
corresponds in every thing that is material to the purpose, with the
actual state of the facts. The Irish do not, indeed, always send the
identical bread, beef, chairs, tables, &c. which the landlord would have
consumed on the spot, to be consumed by him in the foreign country; but
they either send those very articles, or, what comes to the same thing,
they send other articles of exactly the same value. Some readers will
say (I do not impute to yourself such a degree of ignorance) that they
do not send goods, but money; to which my answer is short—if they sent
any money, they could not send much, because Ireland has no gold and
silver mines, and, therefore, cannot continue to export money to one
place, without getting it back again from another. Every body knows that
if a quantity of the precious metals is exported, unless its place is
supplied by paper, it always comes back again. In point of fact,
however, every body who knows any thing about the way in which the
matter is actually managed, knows that no money whatever is sent. The
landlord’s steward sends over to him a Bill of Exchange, drawn upon a
mercantile house; and the drawer of the bill sends over a quantity of
goods to the drawee, to meet the bill when it becomes due.

It appears, therefore, conclusively, that the only difference between
the Edition: current; Page: [105] expenditure of the resident landlord,
and that of the absentee, is this: the one buys, let us say, a thousand
pounds worth of Irish goods, every year on the spot; the other has a
thousand pounds worth of Irish goods every year sent to him. Perhaps you
may be able to discover some great difference which this makes to the
capitalists and labourers in Ireland. Perhaps you may—but if you can,
you can do more than I can.

This error (for unless the above argument be incorrect, you must give me
leave so to denominate your opinion) appears to me to be a relic of the
now exploded mercantile system; of that system, from which emanated
those wise prohibitions of the importation of foreign commodities, which
might have remained to this day monuments of ancestorial wisdom upon our
statute-book, had not Mr. Huskisson been somewhat wiser than that
Hibernian genius, whose lucubrations you honoured yesterday by a place
in your columns.2 The theory on which these sage regulations were
founded, was exactly the same with that which this declaimer and
yourself maintain in opposition to Mr. M’Culloch. By consuming foreign
commodities, you employ foreign labour; by consuming British
commodities, you employ British labour. What Englishman, then, it was
triumphantly asked, can be so lost to patriotism as to lay out that
money upon foreigners, which might have helped to enrich his native
country? Admirably argued, truly; one thing, however, which these
sagacious reasoners did not advert to, was, that, in buying foreign
commodities, you are giving just the same employment to British labour
as if you laid out your whole income in commodities of home growth; you
are giving employment, namely, to that labourer which was employed in
making the British commodities, with which the foreign commodities, that
you consume, were bought.

The case of the man who has French goods sent to him in Ireland, and
that of the man who goes himself and consumes them at Paris, are
precisely similar. If the one be criminal, so must the other be. If the
absentee landlord be an enemy to his country, so is every resident
landlord who expends a shilling upon any article that is not produced—I
was going to say in Ireland—but even on his own estate; and just in
proportion to the number of shillings which he so spends, in that same
proportion is the mischief which he does. We ought, therefore, if this
notion be correct, not only to reimpose upon commerce all the shackles
which Ministers have earned such high and such deserved praise for
taking off, but we ought to do, what I suppose no Government ever did,
prohibit absolutely all foreign, not to say all internal trade. Such is,
perhaps, the wise course that we should pursue, Edition: current; Page:
[106] if the councils of the nations were taken out of the hands of his
Majesty’s Ministers, and placed in those of a set of declaimers, who
either are desirous to mislead, or whose incurable ignorance renders
them just as mischievous as if they were.

I am not so unjust, Sir, as to confound you with such as these; and I
regret the more that you should have given your powerful support to an
opinion so utterly inconsistent with those principles of political
economy which you habitually maintain; an opinion which has had, as I
believe, so great a share in blinding the public to the real causes of
the evils by which Ireland is afflicted.

I remain, Sir, your’s, with the greatest respect,

J.S.

[Addendum]3

What feeds the journeyman tailors, who make the landlord’s coat, is not
the rent of the landlord, but the capital of the master tailor; and if
the landlord’s rent were all thrown into the sea, the capital of the
tailor would remain, and would employ, if not as many tailors, as many
labourers of some sort as it did before.—What employs labourers is
capital. More income, unless saved, and added to capital, employs
nobody; except menial servants. Ireland has just the same capital when
her landlords live in Paris as when they live in Dublin. She, therefore,
employs as many labourers, except menial servants, as above.


35.: BLUNDERS OF THE TIMES
 NEW TIMES, 6 JUNE, 1827, P. 3

This letter, Mill’s only one to the New Times (which he calls “a Tory
paper” in No. 41), is also his first to a newspaper editor for almost
two years. The New Times frequently criticized The Times (which it often
called “The Old Times”); see, e.g., 24 May, 1827, p. 2, and 31 May, p.
3. Mill’s letter, headed “To the Editor of the New Times,” is described
in his bibliography as “A letter on the blunders of the ‘Times’
newspaper which app. in the New Times of 6th June 1827, signed A.B.”

(MacMinn, p. 8).

sir,—

Having frequently admired the happy irony with which you expose the
profound ignorance and ludicrous self-importance of the Times, I address
to you a few lines on the new specimen which it has recently afforded of
these qualities.

In one of its late articles, it is pleased to place under the ban of its
censure, persons, whom it designates, with characteristic elegance of
language, as “those louts and coxcombs united, the landlords, and
political economists.”

Edition: current; Page: [107]
The poor farmers, [it adds,] have been dragooned into all these
petitions against the new Corn Bill, for the mere purpose of keeping up
rents, by those two factions of men, whom we above cited; the one,
duller than the earth they tread; and the other, a mere batch of
fantastical coxcombs, incapable of attaining literature, or fathoming
science; and, therefore, distorting and sophisticating common sense, by
every kind of paradox and extravagance.1

Leaving, Sir, the defence of the landlords in your hands, which are much
more capable of doing it justice than mine, I request your attention to
the following sentence, extracted from the very next paragraph to that
of which I have already quoted the conclusion:

We are well assured, that there is no resting place for our feet; there
is no firm principle upon which our commercial pre-eminence can be
based, or even the landed community rest free from shocks, but the
unrestricted and untaxed circulation of all the necessaries of life,
both for man and beast, throughout the world; and to this point we hope
our steps are tending.

I now submit two questions, not to the Editor of the Times, but to every
man, who is capable of being disgusted by insolent and ignorant
charlatanerie.

1. Here is the Times, professing itself a determined partisan of the
most extreme of all the extreme opinions, which were ever maintained by
ultra-political economists on the Corn Laws, and, in the same breath,
declaring, that the political economists are “fantastical coxcombs,”
“louts and coxcombs united,” for professing the same opinion on the same
subject. I ask, then, is not that Journal admirably qualified for the
office of a public instructor, which ridicules men for their opinions
without knowing that their opinions are the same with its own?

My other question is, whether the accusation of being “incapable of
fathoming science” does not come with an admirable grace from the
Journal, which, only a few months ago, expressed the utmost surprise
that the expectation of a war should have depressed the Funds?2 That the
expected creation of an immense quantity of new Stock, by new Loans,
should lower the price of the Stock already in existence, was too
recondite a truth for this sage, who, nevertheless, thinks himself
entitled to trancher du maître, and denounce others as ignorant of
science!

Your Constant Reader,

A.B.

Edition: current; Page: [108]


36.: THE INHABITANTS OF QUEENBOROUGH
 THE TIMES, 28 DEC., 1827, P. 3

This letter and its enclosed £1 were elicited by “Meeting of the
Inhabitants of Queenborough,” The Times, 26 Dec., 1827, p. 3, in which a
subscription was suggested. On 27 Dec., p. 3, The Times printed three
letters with subscriptions, with an editorial note saying a responsible
gentleman would distribute the money. The Times’ account of the
long-lasting distress of the fishing town in the Isle of Sheppy, Kent,
emphasized the restrictions on the trade enacted by the ruling “select
body,” the kind of closed corporation to which the Philosophic Radicals
strongly objected. The letter, Mill’s first to The Times, is headed as
title, subheaded “To the Editor of The Times,” and described in his
bibliography as “A letter on the Queenborough case, inclosing a
subscription for the inhabitants of Queenborough, signed Ph., in the
Times of 28th December 1827”

(MacMinn, p. 8).

sir,—

I shall feel obliged by your consenting to be the depositary of the
enclosed subscription, towards an object which a nation, which makes
greater pretension to humanity than any other will not, I trust,
disgrace itself by neglecting—the relief of the ruined and destitute
inhabitants of Queenborough, whose misery is so affectingly depicted in
your paper of Wednesday.

But if it be a duty to relieve the miserable, the punishment of those
who have rendered them so is a still more imperative one. And the 1l.
herewith transmitted shall cheerfully be increased to 10l., so soon as
any practicable course shall be entered upon to effect that righteous
purpose.

Can it be endured that proprietary rights, on which thousands depended
as their sole means of support, should be seized by a self-elected body
of seven persons, under pretence that the common property of the
corporation is their property—that they, the trustees, the depositaries,
the executive officers, the servants of the burgesses, have a right to
say to their masters, “Go and starve”? Is it to be borne, that when
those whom a court of law has declared to have a right to employment in
the fisheries, are compelled by starvation to sue for it as a favour,
they should be told, with an oath, by one of their magistrates, that he
would never give them any employment while breath was in his body, or
tauntingly exhorted to go and ask employment of him for whom they had
voted? Can Englishmen suffer this, and listen without a blush to the
congratulations of foreigners on the felicity with which our
Constitution has reconciled the apparently conflicting advantages of
freedom and law? No, Sir, I cannot persuade myself that the means of
enforcing their right will be withheld from these unfortunate people by
a nation which maintains more charitable institutions than all the rest
of the world taken together. Our countrymen, whatever may be their
faults, have rarely forgotten their reverence for the two great
blessings of human life—liberty and property. And will they tamely
suffer the whole Edition: current; Page: [109] population of a
considerable town to be illegally deprived of the one as a punishment
for their inflexible constancy in adhering to the other?

Ph.

Received a pound [Editor].


37.: NEW MINISTERIAL PUBLICATIONS
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 31 MAY, 1828, P. 3

These satirical comments (see also Nos. 38, 39, and 40) were prompted by
the actions of the Tory ministry formed in January 1828 by Arthur
Wellesley (1769-1852), the 1st Duke of Wellington, a target of Radical
criticism. The unsigned article is Mill’s first contribution to the
Morning Chronicle since September 1825. It is headed as title and
described in his bibliography as “A squib on the Wellington ministry,
headed New Publications—and two following paragraphs in the Morning
Chronicle of 31st May 1828” (MacMinn, p. 9). A printer’s rule (here
reproduced) appears in the Morning Chronicle after the 9th paragraph; it
is followed by three further paragraphs. Assuming that the entry in the
bibliography is accurate, we have excluded the final paragraph from the
text, but included it in a footnote.

it is currently reported, that the Duke of Wellington, having become
sensible of the detriment which his new Ministry is likely to sustain in
public estimation, from the vulgar prejudice, that none except men of
talents and information are qualified to administer the affairs of the
State, has resolved to establish an office for the publication and
distribution of works of a practical character, suited to the
composition of the Ministry, and to the exigencies of the times. Doctor
Croker being the only Member of the New Administration who can write,1
has undertaken the office of correcting the press; and the following
works are confidently announced as shortly about to appear:—

The Dunce’s Manual, or Politics made level with the meanest Capacity:
For the use of elderly Gentlemen appointed Cabinet Ministers at a short
notice.

Bob Short’s Rules for Governing a State, whereby the whole Science of
Government may be learned in a quarter of an hour, without hindrance of
amusements, or knowledge of a bookseller.2

The Inutility of Ideas to Public Men, Stated and Exemplified: being an
attempt to prove that none but persons totally ignorant of public
affairs are competent to Edition: current; Page: [110] administer them.
Under the immediate patronage of the Lords of the Treasury, and the
three Secretaries of State.

A new edition of Erasmus’s Moriae Encomium, or Praise of Folly:3 with
portraits of the New Ministers, beautifully engraven on brass, by George
Cruikshank,4 and an Appendix, shewing the peculiar applicability of the
author’s Principles to the Government of the British Empire.

Murray’s First Book for Statesmen: Being a Compendious Treatise on the
Cavalry Exercise, for the use of Young Members of Parliament, and
Candidates for Public Employment. By Lieutentant-General Sir George
Murray, K.G.H. and T.S., Col. of the 42d Foot, and Principal Secretary
of State for the Colonies.5

Shoulder Arms! A Tyrtaean Poem,6 addressed to the Nobility, Gentry, and
Clergy of Great Britain and Ireland. By Field-Marshal his Grace the Duke
of Wellington, Drill-Serjeant to the Bench of Bishops, and to both
Houses of Parliament.

Moderate Talents best fitted for Affairs of State: an Essay, shewing,
from practical Experience, the Dangerousness of confiding political
Employments to clever Men. Addressed to the moderately-informed. With
Remarks on the unexceptionable Character of the present Administration,
in this respect.—Also, by the same Author,

The Vanity of Human Learning; or, The Wonderful Worldly Wisdom of
Knowing Nothing:7 wherein are set forth the manifold Advantages, in a
practical Point of View, of Ignorance over Knowledge, and the
Sufficiency of Reading, Writing, and the Manual Exercise, for the
Education of a Cabinet Minister. With a comparative View of Mr. Canning,
and the Duke of Wellington, Mr. Huskisson, and Sir George Murray,
Turgot, and Sir Thomas Gooch:8 shewing Edition: current; Page: [111] the
extreme Ignorance of the latter Statesmen, and calling upon all Persons
of moderate Intellect to support them.

On the occasion of a recent schism in the Ministry,9 the Duke of
Wellington is reported to have said, “There shall be but one head to my
Administration.” Dr. Croker, who was accidentally present, was heard to
mutter, “Fait, and sure now, that won’t be your Grace’s own, Duke dear.”

Another on dit of the day is, that in the course of the late Cabinet
disputes, Mr. Huskisson formally accused Messrs. Dawson and Goulburn10
of a conspiracy to set the Thames on fire—which those Gentlemen
indignantly denied, protesting that all their friends could avouch them
to be altogether incapable of such a proceeding.11


38.: ADVERTISEMENTS FREE OF DUTY
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 3 JUNE, 1828, P. 4

The second of Mill’s short satiric attacks on the Wellington ministers
(see Nos. 37, 39, and 40), this item is described in his bibliography as
“Another squib on the same subject, headed Advertisements Free of Duty,
in the Morning Chronicle of 3d June 1828”

(MacMinn, p. 9).

wanted immediately, a person qualified to teach Arithmetic with
rapidity. The advertiser is desirous to proceed as far as Long Division.
Expedition is Edition: current; Page: [112] indispensable, the Budget
being positively fixed for this month.—Apply to H. Goulburn, at the
Treasury, Whitehall.


Just Published

To the Right About Face; or, Decision. A Farce, in one act, recently
performed with unqualified success at the Theatre Royal, Downing-street;
the principal characters by the Duke of Wellington and Mr. Huskisson;
with the words of the original Laughing Cantata, executed at the
conclusion of the performance by Mr. Peel, accompanied by Messrs.
Goulburn, Herries,1 Dawson, and the remainder of the
Commander-in-Chief’s band.—N.B. It is expected that on the next
representation, this piece of music will be repeated by the same
performer, on the other side of his mouth.

one guinea reward.—Lost or stolen, from a Cabinet of Curiosities near
the Treasury, a Skull. It is extremely thick, and the eyes are so fixed
in it, as to be unable to see beyond the length of the nose. It is also
remarkably soft to the touch, and the organ of place is very strongly
developed. It is entirely empty, and of no use to any person, except the
owner. The reward offered, greatly exceeds the value of the article, as
the owner having recently been appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer,
cannot conveniently do without it.

[Advertisement.]2—In consequence of the repeated complaints against
divided Cabinets, Wellington, Cabinet-maker to his Majesty, has the
honour to inform the Nobility and Gentry, that after several
unsuccessful experiments, he has at length succeeded in constructing one
which is all of a piece. This excellent article of furniture is entirely
cut out of the old block, and is composed of pure logwood, without the
slightest mixture of any other material, except in the facing, which is
of brass. One trial will prove the fact.—Exhibited daily at St.
Stephen’s Chapel, Westminster.3 Doors open at Three in the afternoon,
begin at Four. Seats may be procured at Gatton and Old Sarum, or of
Messrs. Hertford and Lonsdale, House Agents, next door to the premises.4

Edition: current; Page: [113]


39.: DR. CROKER’S OPINION
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 4 JUNE, 1828, P. 3

This brief satire on the Wellington ministry (see Nos. 37, 38, and 40),
headed “Doctor Croker’s Opinion on the Cause of the Late Ministerial
Dispute,” is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A third short squib on
the same subject in the same paper of 4th June consisting of two
paragraphs, beginning, Dr. Croker’s opinion on the cause of the late
ministerial dispute”

(MacMinn, p. 9).

doctor croker’s opinion on the Cause of the Late Ministerial
Dispute.—Sorrow a bit could he understand how the payple could so
desayve themselves, as to fancy that his Grace, dare cratur, was no
arithmetician. Sure it was himself that was mad with Mr. Huskisson,
about nothing in life, barring that he couldn’t tache him a lesson of
cyphering, by Jasus!

Report says, that Sir George Murray, the new Colonial Secretary,
yesterday presented the Duke of Wellington with a handsome copy of his
English Spelling Book,1 accompanied by a note, recommending to the
Duke’s particular attention that part which treats of letters, it
appearing, from recent transactions, that his Grace cannot at present
understand them.2


40.: ANOTHER OPINION OF DR. CROKER’S
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 5 JUNE, 1828, P. 3

The final satire in this series on the Wellington ministry (see Nos. 37,
38, and 39) is an unheaded paragraph described in Mill’s bibliography as
“A fourth short squib, on the same subject in the same paper of 5th
June, only one paragraph concerning Dr. Croker”

(MacMinn, p. 10).

some person having expressed his surprise that any Minister should have
thought of placing the finances of the State under the charge of Mr.
George Dawson and of Mr. Goulburn, it being extremely problematical
whether those gentlemen had been sufficiently successful in their
arithmetical studies, to admit Edition: current; Page: [114] of their
being pronounced well-grounded in the multiplication table, Dr. Croker
replied, that “He couldn’t spake, any how, consarning that same; but it
was themselves that were nate lads at a division, by St. Patrick.”


41.: COMPENSATION TO THE SHOPKEEPERS ON THE APPROACHES TO LONDON BRIDGE
 BRITISH TRAVELLER, 29 SEPT., 1828, P. 3

This article is Mill’s contribution to the public controversy (see,
e.g., The Times, 10 Sept., p. 3, 11 Sept., p. 3, 17 Sept., pp. 3-4, 23
Sept., p. 3, 2 Oct., p. 3) over a proposal that was enacted as 10 George
IV, Private Acts, c. 136 (1829). The expensive and potentially litigious
proposal was opposed by the small tradesmen of the area, which included
Fish Street Hill; Mill contrasts their position with that of the wealthy
of Grosvenor Square in the West End, remote from this governmental
interference with the rights of property. The unsigned, unheaded leading
article is Mill’s only contribution to the British Traveller. It is
described in his bibliography as “A leading article in the British
Traveller of 27th September [sic] 1828 on the question of compensation
to the shopkeepers on the approaches to London Bridge”

(MacMinn, p. 10).

the approaches to the new london bridge are every day becoming the
subject of increased discussion. Perhaps if in deciding upon this point,
nothing were requisite to be taken into the account except public
convenience, it would have been disposed of in a more summary manner.
But it seems that in this, as in so many other projects of improvement,
a consideration has intruded itself, which, under our national
institutions, and with our national modes of thinking, is apt to be
esteemed far more important than public convenience, and this is, the
convenience of particular individuals.

Nobody, in this or in any other country, is so impudent as to say, that
his individual interest ought to be attended to first, and the public
interest afterwards. But instead of one man, put the case that there are
two or three score, much more if there be two or three hundred, and what
no one of them would have the face to claim for himself, every man among
them will boldly demand for himself and company.

If nobody felt and acted in this manner, except the grocers and
cheesemongers of Fish street hill, no doubt it would be very justly
considered a flagrant enormity. If, however, these shopkeepers are only
following the admired and applauded example of their betters, it might
be expected that what is thought very proper and patriotic in those
betters, would hardly be stigmatized as unjust and selfish in them. We
were therefore surprised to find an attempt made, in a recent number of
a Tory paper, to hold up these respectable persons to public
disapprobation, because they, too, thought it proper to stand up for the
interests of their “order.”1

Edition: current; Page: [115]
But there is a distinction running through the whole frame of English
society, which, when it is fully seized, explains no small quantity of
what would otherwise appear altogether enigmatical in the workings of
that society. Fielding describes Bridewell as “that house where the
inferior sort of people may learn one good lesson, viz.—respect and
deference to their superiors, since it must show them the wide
distinction fortune intends between those persons who are to be
corrected for their faults, and those who are not.”2 The New Times, in
its animadversions upon the Fish street hill shopkeepers, intends, no
doubt, to read them a similar lesson; to put them in mind of the wide
distinction which our institutions intend between those who are to have
their interest preferred to the general interest, and those who are not.

There is no other country in the world, says the New Times, in which the
best avenues to such a structure as London Bridge would be rejected, for
fear of affecting the paltry interests of a few shopkeepers. We hope
not; and we hope, likewise, that there is no other country in the world
in which the public would be taxed ten or twelve millions in the price
of their bread, and exposed to incessant vicissitudes of glut and
famine, for fear of affecting the paltry interests of a few landlords.3
We are sure that there is no other country in which a bill, such as the
County Courts’ Bill, for extending the benefits of an administration of
justice to the largest portion of the people, to whom at present it may
be said, with scarcely any exaggeration, to be altogether inaccessible,
would be rejected year after year by the legislature on the avowed
ground, that it would affect the paltry interests of Lord Ellenborough,
and two or three other holders of law sinecures.4

It was doubtless a great piece of presumption in the persons whom the
New Times reprehends, to imagine that what might be proper and
commendable in so exalted a personage as Lord Ellenborough, was
allowable in persons who were no better than shopkeepers, and who lived
in no other street than Fish street hill. If the proposed approaches had
encroached upon a Nobleman’s park, or had passed so much as within a
quarter of a mile of his game preserves, it is probable Edition:
current; Page: [116] that we should have heard another story about
paltry interests. But it is a mistake, to suppose that cheesemongers can
have vested rights. Cheesemongers are only virtually represented. Lords
and Landlords not only are actually represented, but virtually represent
the Cheesemongers themselves. They may, therefore, possess vested
rights: if they possess any thing which they do not like to give up, it
is a vested right: and having received this name, however little they
may be entitled to it, or however imperatively the public interest may
require the sacrifice of it, to demand it would be to infringe upon the
sacred rights of property. All this, to the New Times, is gospel: but
that journal is far too acute not to seize the distinction between Fish
street hill, and Grosvenor square, and to perceive, that with lawgivers
as well as other men, there is all the difference in the world between
doing a dishonest thing for their own interest, and doing exactly the
same thing for the interest of other people.


42.: THE BRUNSWICK CLUBS
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 30 OCT., 1828, P. 3

This letter is in response to the agitations promoted by the Brunswick
Clubs in opposition to Catholic Emancipation (which was enacted, to the
outrage of a large section of his party, by the Duke of Wellington in
1829, 10 George IV, c. 7). The Brunswick Clubs, founded in Ireland in
1827 as an offshoot of the Orange Society, and named for the German
House of Brunswick, were spreading rapidly in England in the autumn of
1828 under the active patronage of the Duke of Cumberland (1771-1851),
fifth son of George III. The agitation reached a head with a large
meeting on Penenden Heath, Kent, on 24 Oct., 1828, at which the
attendance was variously estimated between 25,000 and 60,000. The
analogy with military “musters” is in “Brunswick Agitation in the
Country of Kent,” Spectator, 16 Oct., p. 247. Mill’s signature,
“Lamoignon,” probably refers to Nicolas de Lamoignon (1648-1724),
Intendant of Montauban, whose administration was marked by vigorous
measures against the Camisards, extreme Protestants who took up arms
after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. The letter is headed “To
the Editor of the Morning Chronicle” and is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A letter signed Lamoignon in the Morning Chronicle of
30th October 1828 on the Brunswick Clubs” (MacMinn, p. 10). For nearly
two years following this letter, Mill published nothing

(see No. 43).

sir,—

The “Brunswick muster,” as it is aptly denominated by your contemporary,
The Spectator, has at length taken place. The party not having, as they
are well aware, any great strength to boast of on the score of heads,
are at least determined to let the country see how great a number of
hands they can put in requisition on an emergency. Their first exploit
has given, it appears, great satisfaction to their own minds. They are
as elate with their triumph, as if any part of it had been due to the
force of their logic, or to the brilliancy of their oratory. They hug
themselves on their majority, as if the number of their votes were a
proof of any thing whatever but the number of their acres. Had the
Freeholders of Kent been free agents, these personages could not have
raised a Edition: current; Page: [117] greater din of self-gratulation.
They talk as magnificently of public opinion as if every child did not
know, that all the opinion in the matter is their own opinion reflected
back from their tenantry. The boast of the moment is, that the nation is
with them; and the nation is every thing that is excellent and
respectable, till it suits their purpose that it should be directly the
reverse.

This signal respect for popular opinion, considering from what quarter
it comes, is at least new. We were not always accustomed to so much
deference, in certain personages, for the will of the people.
Expressions of popular feeling were not deemed worthy of so much
obedience when the feeling expressed was a reluctance to be starved by a
bread-tax for the benefit of rent, and buried in a gaol “on suspicion of
being suspected” of an encroachment upon the landlord’s monopoly of
game.1 It was not respect which was felt for the voice of the nation,
when it complained that the life-blood of the nation was drained from it
in exorbitant taxation, to be profligately expended in affording a
patrimony to the younger branches of certain families.2 There was a time
when public opinion was only named to be insulted; only interfered with
to be bound down and gagged. I congratulate these Lords and Gentlemen on
their conversion. It is somewhat tardy; but it still is welcome. Some
slight shew of external respect towards a people whose bread so many of
their relations eat, is at least decent. Pity that they did not see at a
somewhat earlier period the error of their ways. The country might have
been spared the recollection of more than one act, which will not
redound to the honour of the British Aristocracy in future ages, nor
perhaps of the nation, which an Aristocracy of such a stamp could so
quietly rule.

What strange destiny! By what marvellous overturning and reversing of
the established relations of things have English Borough Lords given in
their adhesion to the “sovereignty of the people;” and the men who
cheered the declaration of the Duke of Wellington, that county meetings
were a farce,3 appealed from the Duke of Wellington to a county meeting?
I am not one of those who profess a sort of instinctive horror of “new
lights;”4 I think little of the Edition: current; Page: [118] wisdom,
and not much of the sincerity, of such horrors. But the new lights which
break in upon the professed enemies of new lights appear to me an object
of very well-grounded distrust. I am suspicious of those, who then first
discover the value of a nation’s support, when for some immediate and
momentary purpose they happen to need it. A lesson so conveniently
learned, may no doubt be as conveniently forgotten, when need requires.
I shall give credit to these Lords and Gentlemen for their popular
principles when I behold them calling forth the people to join with them
in any exalted and generous scheme of philanthropy and benevolence. But,
as one of the multitude, I give these Noble Personages no thanks that I
am summoned to aid them, not in giving freedom to the oppressed, or
relief to the afflicted, but in silencing groans with bayonets, and
wading up to the knees in the blood of six millions of my countrymen. I
complain that, by these new candidates for my favour, no appeal is ever
made to any but the mere grovelling and brutish part of my natural
Constitution. I am little flattered when I perceive that I am never
thought capable of being used for any services but those to which a wild
beast would be perfectly adequate—and that my voice is never deemed
worthy to be listened to in affairs of State, but when it is hoped, that
swelled into rage by savage and malignant passions, it will emit sounds
of hatred and ferocity against those over whom, for purposes in which I
have no concern, it has been resolved to tyrannize.

But there is one consolatory assurance which may be gathered from the
appeal of the Brunswick faction to the British people. The support for
which they condescend to stoop so low, they assuredly need. It is
unquestionably from no common necessity that they fly for help to those
for whom, in the days of their pride, they have so little made a secret
of their utter aversion and contempt. Perhaps, like other scornful
persons before them, they have learned by experience, that very high
people may need that assistance which very low people can give. They
have little hope of other support, when they will throw themselves upon
ours. They feel their weakness, and they feel it with mortification and
rage. The feeling is excusable. It is new and strange to them as yet to
find any difficulty in keeping their foot on any neck upon which it has
once been planted. The loss of power is not familiar to them; it is what
they have not yet learned to bear. Every sentence of the famous letter
of the Duke of Newcastle betrays a deep and painful sense of
humiliation.5 Ill does he brook to renounce that tone of lofty authority
so natural to the Lord of five Boroughs, and descend Edition: current;
Page: [119] to the unaccustomed language of complaint and solicitation.
His Grace does not easily use himself to the lachrymose tone. It does
not sit gracefully upon him. His first efforts in the comédie larmoyante
have all the inexperienced awkwardness of a beginner.—Amidst the most
piteous of his complaints, it is easy to discern how much more to his
taste the Aristocratic sic volo sic jubeo would be.6 He probably would
not be flattered by being told that he excites the commiseration of
others; but he evidently is perfectly sincere in pitying himself.

The Ultra faction7 are driven to their last resource. It was pleasanter,
it was easier to govern the country by the strong arm of power, wielded
by an obedient Ministry. For twenty years this scheme of Government had
succeeded to their wish; and great was their surprise when they
discovered, on a sudden, that it would endure no longer. They laid the
blame of this disappointment at first upon those at the helm, who, they
thought, having been formerly overpraised for being useful tools, had
been puffed up by self-conceit to aspire above their station, and
imagine that they might venture to be tools no longer. The new and
unexpected difficulty which the Ultras found in governing the country
being thus satisfactorily accounted for, they cast their eyes round the
circle of the trading politicians of the day, and explored who among the
hacks in office, or the hacks who wished to be in office, were the most
narrow-minded and illiberal, the most ignorant and inept, and the most
destitute of all moral dignity and decent self-respect. Having found
that which they sought—having ascertained, as they conceived, which were
the individuals who, in a field where such commodities abound, united in
the greatest degree all these requisites; being satisfied with the
result of their search, they resolved that of these individuals, thus
pricked out, their next Ministry should be composed. Accident rather
than their own strength gave them the Ministry of their choice; and if
jobbing for them, and truckling to them, in any ordinary mode of
truckling and jobbing, would have contented them, few Administrations
ever did so much, in so short a time, to justify the selection. But no
Ministry dares do all, which, at the present crisis, the interests of
these men require, and their tongues do not scruple to demand. They
wanted a Tory Ministry; they have had their wish, and they cannot find
men who do not shrink from the responsibility of a bellum internecinum8
between the soldiers on one side, and one-third part of the people on
the other. Men in conspicuous stations, exposed to the public eye, who
know that the opinion of mankind at Edition: current; Page: [120] least
will render them personally answerable for the evils which come upon
their country through their means, are not hastily or easily brought to
the perpetration of a great crime, to uphold a domination which to them
is of no advantage, and satiate passions which they do not share. Since,
then, the Ultras can find no other instruments to do their work, they
hope at least to make instruments of the people. Their last desperate
shift is to terrify their own Minister with that popular voice which
they had themselves taught him to despise. What portion of the people
fair or foul means will procure to back them in their unhallowed
enterprise, a few weeks, or at farthest a few months, will disclose. But
it is at least the duty of those who detest it as it deserves not to
indulge a sleepy inactivity, nor flatter themselves with the idea that,
when wicked men are preparing wicked deeds, it is enough for the good to
sit still and silently disapprove. What, in all nations and in all ages,
has caused the successes of interested villainy, is the indifference of
the well-intentioned. The remark has been often repeated,9 but it is
little attended to; why? apparently because it has not been repeated
enough.

I shall, perhaps, continue to address to you a few occasional remarks,
as this great drama unfolds itself.

Lamoignon

Edition: current; Page: [121]


July 1830 to July 1831


43.: THE FRENCH ELECTIONS
 EXAMINER, 18 JULY, 1830, PP. 449-50

In his Autobiography, after mentioning his ceasing to contribute to the
Westminster Review after “Scott’s Life of Napoleon” appeared in April
1828 (CW, Vol. XX, pp. 53-110), Mill says that for “some years after
this time” he “wrote very little, and nothing regularly, for
publication” (CW, Vol. I, p. 136), and his bibliography lists only Nos.
37-42 between “Scott’s Life of Napoleon” and this leading article on the
French Elections of July 1830. In fact he wrote a “treatise” or “tract”
on an economic subject, which he submitted to the Library of Useful
Knowledge on 23 Jan., 1829 (EL, CW, Vol. XIII, p. 742), about which
nothing else is known. The silence ended when the July Revolution in
France, following on the elections, “roused [his] utmost enthusiasm, and
gave [him], as it were, a new existence” (CW, Vol. I, p. 179). The
published result is seen in the flood of articles on France that he
wrote in the next four years for the Examiner. During this time, Mill
says, he “wrote nearly all the articles on French subjects [for the
Examiner] . . . together with many leading articles on general politics,
commercial and financial legislation, and any miscellaneous subjects in
which I felt interested, and which were suitable to the paper, including
occasional reviews of books” (ibid., pp. 179-81). By October 1832 he
was, he told Thomas Carlyle, writing “nothing regularly for the Examiner
except the articles on French affairs” (EL, CW, Vol. XII, p. 125).

In this leading article Mill, in accordance with his belief that the
English are ignorant of French affairs (and Continental affairs
generally), explains the background of the shift to the left in the
recent elections in France and the growing opposition in the country to
the regime of Charles X (1757-1836). The previous elections, held in
November 1827, had greatly increased the strength of the liberals in the
Chamber of Deputies, giving them about two-fifths of the seats,
approximately the same number going to the royalist supporters of
Charles, and the remainder to the right opposition. This result ended
the conservative ministry of comte Jean Baptiste Séraphin Joseph de
Villèle (1773-1854), and there followed a period of moderate leadership
by the vicomte de Martignac (see No. 45). Displeased by the liberal
measures adopted, the King succeeded in 1829 in appointing an
ultra-royalist ministry with prince Jules Auguste Armand Marie de
Polignac (1780-1847) at its head. Liberal opposition continued to grow,
and reached its height in the reply to the King’s address at the opening
of the session in March 1830, a protest by 221 Deputies, demanding
ministers responsible to a majority in the chambers. Charles dissolved
the Deputies on 16 May, and announced new elections.

The Charter to which Mill repeatedly refers is the Charte
constitutionnelle, Bulletin des lois du royaume de France, Bull. 17, No.
133 (4 June, 1814). Granted by Louis XVIII (1755-1824) on his accession,
and modified in 1815 after the Hundred Days, it established a new
constitution for France that, while guaranteeing political liberties and
imposing some limits on the monarch, nevertheless left the direction of
the government in his hands. On 20 May, 1830, Charles X had intimated
indirectly that he was prepared to Edition: current; Page: [122] use the
powers he claimed were granted him by Article 14 of the Charter to
govern by ordinance if the Chamber of Deputies failed to support his
policies.

When Mill writes, the first stage of the French elections—that of the
arrondissement electoral colleges, which elected 258 deputies and were
made up of all male residents paying 300 francs a year in direct
taxes—had taken place on 23 June; the second stage—that of the
departmental colleges, which elected 172 deputies and were made up of
the top 25 per cent of the taxpayers, who thus had a double vote—had
occurred on 3 July, except in twenty departments (not nineteen as Mill
thought).

The death of George IV on 25 June necessitated elections in England at
this same time, elections which would replace the government of the Duke
of Wellington with that of the 2nd Earl Grey and lead directly into the
crisis over the Reform Bill.

This item, which begins the “Political Examiner,” headed as title and
unsigned, is not in the Somerville College set of the Examiner, which
begins with 15 Aug., 1830. It is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A
leading article on the French Elections in the Examiner of 18th July
1830”

(MacMinn, p. 10).

the departmental, or grand colleges, have now completed their operations
throughout all France, except 19 departments. In those departments the
elections were postponed by the Government, to afford time for the Court
of Cassation to disfranchise a considerable number of electors who had
been declared by the inferior Courts entitled to vote.

Exclusive of these nineteen departments, which include Paris, Rouen, and
their vicinity, and in which the ministry are sure of a complete defeat,
the departmental elections have afforded results as auspicious to the
liberal cause as the elections for the arrondissemens. The royalists,
indeed, still retain a majority, but that majority is greatly
diminished. At no election previous to the last had a single liberal
candidate been returned by a departmental college. At the last elections
in 1827, about one third of the deputies elected by these colleges were
liberal. In the present elections the proportion will be much greater.
Without reckoning the deputies for the nineteen departments, of which
the elections have been adjourned, the opposition had in the late
Chamber 34 departmental members; it has now 46.

As the departmental colleges may be said to be composed of the twenty
thousand richest men in a population of 30 millions, the great and rapid
increase of the strength of the liberal party in these colleges is a
still more striking indication of the progress of the public mind, than
the liberal majority in the colleges of arrondissemens. The most
bigotted English Tory cannot affect to see in such a struggle as the
present any tincture of Jacobinism, if Jacobinism be, as Burke defined
it, “an insurrection of the talents of a country against its property.”1
The insurrection, if such it can be called, is an insurrection of the
intelligence and property of the country against an attempt to impose on
them a Edition: current; Page: [123] ministry who are not only declared
enemies to the reform of whatever is bad in the present laws or
administration of France, but likewise, as the nation from long
experience universally believes, irreclaimably hostile to the existing
constitution of their country.

The French nation has been most absurdly reproached, particularly by the
Times newspaper, for having condemned the Polignac ministry without
trial.2 If Mr. Cobbett were placed at the head of an English ministry,
would the Times scruple to declare its hostility to his administration,
because Mr. Cobbett had never been First Lord of the Treasury before?3
Men whose whole political life has condemned them, as statesmen and as
citizens, are not entitled to be tried over again in the situation of
ministers, all measures of national improvement being stopped while the
trial proceeds.

The opposition to the Polignac ministry is both of a reforming and of a
conservative character. It is a conservative opposition as respects the
political constitution of France, established by the Charter, which it
defends against the Ministry, and the emigrants and their friends. It is
a reforming opposition, as respects the multitude of gross abuses, which
the representative system, established by the Charter, has not been able
to prevent or extirpate.—The object of the Ministry, on the contrary, is
to guard these abuses, to introduce others, and to overthrow either
entirely or partially the representative system, which renders the
introduction of new abuses extremely difficult, and which now at length
seriously menaces the old ones.

The great and leading abuse which exists in France, and from which all
the others flow, is the inordinate power of the government,—of the
administration, in the common sense,—the crown, and its officers. In
England, the ministry are the mere servants of an oligarchy, composed of
borough-holders and owners of large masses of property: the abuses of
which we complain, exist for the benefit of that oligarchy, not for the
private interest or importance of men in office; and any one who should
complain of the undue power of the Ministers as such, would be justly
ridiculous. But in France, the oligarchy which engrosses all power, and
manages and mismanages all public affairs from the greatest to the
least, is what has been expressively termed a bureaucratie—it is the
aggregate body of the functionaries of Government with the Ministry at
their head. The power which in Great Britain is shared in Local
Corporations, Parish Vestries, Churchwardens, Commissioners of Roads,
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, acting separately and in Quarter Sessions,*
and numerous other local officers or bodies, Edition: current; Page:
[124] is in France exclusively exercised by the Government, and by
officers appointed and removable at its pleasure. All establishments for
education are under the direct superintendance of the Government. Almost
all the public works, which in England are executed by voluntary
associations of individuals, with all the power and patronage annexed to
them, devolve in France upon the Government, partly from the scarcity of
capital in France as compared with England, partly from the obstacles
which the French laws oppose to all combinations of individuals for
public purposes—the extent of which obstacles, and the degree in which
the immense natural advantages of France are rendered useless by them,
would utterly astonish our readers if we were to lay before them the
requisite particulars. The French police has powers over individual
security and freedom of action, which are utterly irreconcileable with
good government.

The proximate object of the present opposition, so far as it is a
reforming opposition, is to limit and curb this all-pervading influence
of the Government, by destroying the system of centralization (this most
expressive word has no synonym in English) from which it takes its rise.
There are now many able and influential persons in France, who have
studied England and the English Government, not as it is represented in
books, but in its actual working and practical effects. They have seen
at home the necessity that local affairs should be managed by local
bodies; they have seen in England that when a local body is so
constituted as to be an oligarchy, it far surpasses in jobbing and
mismanagement even the great Oligarchy itself. They consequently desire
the same securities for the integrity of the local bodies, which the
Charter has provided for that of the general government. The executive
officer, the prefect or mayor, they purpose should continue as at
present, to be appointed and removable by the King. But their aim
is—that the deliberative body, the council of the town, or of the
department, should be chosen by the same electoral body which chuses the
members of the representative branch of the general government, namely,
the 80,000 persons or thereabouts, who pay 300 francs, or 12l. per annum
of direct taxes.

The avowed purpose for which the Polignac Ministry was formed was, to
resist this and all similar improvements. The manifesto which they
issued the very day after their election, treated elective
municipalities as a relic of Jacobinism. In the same document they
announced as the principle of their administration, point de
concessions, point de réaction,—no further concessions to the public
voice, no retractation of the concessions already made.4 The French
nation did not believe them when they said, point de réaction: but even
on their own showing, they were determined to refuse all concessions.
The 80,000 electors and the nation deem concessions indispensable, and
the electors would therefore have been guilty of cowardly truckling, if
they had not re-elected the Edition: current; Page: [125] 221 deputies
who declared to the King that they had not confidence in his ministers.5

If even the professed designs of the ministry warranted the general
burst of indignation with which their appointment was received, how much
more so the designs which the nation, and even their own party, ascribes
to them, and which, though not directly avowed, can scarcely be said to
be disguised.

The present ministers, to a man, belong to that section of the party
calling themselves Royalists, who from the first dissuaded Louis XVIII
from granting the Charter, and who have ever been its declared enemies.
All the measures of that party, when in power, have been so many
encroachments, or attempts to encroach, upon the constitution
established by the Charter, and upon the liberties and privileges which
it guaranteed. According to the Charter, all the members of the Chamber
of Deputies were elected by the 80,000 electors who form the colleges of
arrondissement.6 The Royalists added a fourth to the number of the
deputies, and that fourth is elected exclusively by the 20,000 richest.7
By the Charter, one fifth of the Chamber went out by rotation every
year.8 The Royalists passed a Septennial Act.9 By a law which still
subsists, no community of Jesuits can exist on French soil: the Royalist
ministry not only connived at the existence of such communities, but
threw the education of the greater part of the French youth, and the
nomination to the subordinate public offices, almost exclusively into
the hands of the Jesuits.10 This first disgusted with the measures of
the court all the most honest and intelligent part of the Royalist
party; this it was which threw such men as Montlosier, the ablest
literary champion of the royal power, into the ranks of the liberals.11
A Royalist minister abolished the militia, or national guard, because
they refused to turn Manuel out of the Chamber of Deputies, for
exercising what in England would be considered a moderate and Edition:
current; Page: [126] constitutional freedom of speech.12 A Royalist
Ministry and a Royalist Chamber restored Ferdinand of Spain to absolute
power, by the men and money of a people said to be under a
constitutional government.13 A Royalist Ministry and a Royalist Chamber
passed the famous law of sacrilege, for punishing the profanation of the
sacred elements in the Eucharist,—a law worthy of the days of Calas and
La Barre, and which persuaded the civilized world that the reign of
despotism was assured for another century, and that France was relapsing
into the servitude and superstition of the middle ages.14

A Royalist Chamber of Deputies passed the law of primogeniture,15 which,
for the avowed purpose of creating a hereditary aristocracy, offered
violence to the strongest and most deeply-rooted sentiment of the most
united public mind in Europe. A Royalist Chamber of Deputies passed the
law for restraining the press, nick-named by its author, M. de
Peyronnet, “une loi d’amour,” by which not only all newspapers but all
pamphlets and small books were placed under the almost absolute control
of the ministry.16 The hereditary Chamber of Peers rejected both these
laws; and a Royalist Ministry attempted to overpower the Edition:
current; Page: [127] voice of the majority, by creating from among their
hacks in the Lower Chamber seventy-six new Peers at one stroke,17 among
all whom there was only one name* not odious or contemptible to all
France.

Such is the political history of the party which has raised the Polignac
Ministry to power, and by which alone that Ministry is supported. Let us
now speak of the individuals. M. de Polignac was one of that portion of
the emigrants who, after their return to France, refused to swear to the
Charter. M. de la Bourdonnaye proposed that all who had accepted office
under Napoleon, after his return from Elba, should be put to death.18
His successor, M. de Peyronnet, is of ill repute, even in his private
character, and the most violent and unbending member of the Villèle
Ministry. M. de Montbel is the habitual apologist of that Ministry in
the late Chamber. M. de Bourmont is odious to the army, for having gone
over to the enemy on the field of battle; and finally, M. de
Guernon-Ranville was only known, before his elevation to the Ministry,
for having publicly declared that he gloried in being a
counter-revolutionist, that is, in being an enemy to all benefits which
France has purchased by the sacrifice of an entire generation.19

If the intentions of the Ministry are to be judged by the ostentatious
declarations of their partizans, they are disposed to carry matters with
a higher hand than the most audacious of their predecessors. There is
not a royalist journal, including those known to be connected with the
Ministry, which does not openly declare that the King will not yield,
and that if the Chamber refuses to vote the taxes, they will be levied
from the people by a Royal Ordonnance. Edition: current; Page: [128]
According to a mode of interpretation by which any thing may be made to
mean any thing, they affirm that one of the articles of the Charter
authorizes the King, when he sees urgent necessity, to make laws and
levy taxes by his own authority,—that is, that one article of the
Charter nullifies all the others. By virtue of this article, according
to the ministerial papers, the King is determined, if the Chamber
refuses the budget, to reassume absolute power, either definitively, or
for the purpose of altering the law of election, and obtaining a Chamber
which will be a passive instrument of his will. The liberal papers say
that this is mere bravado; that the King will not be so imprudent as to
attempt the entire subversion of the established constitution; that if
he does attempt to levy taxes, either by proclamation or by the vote of
a Chamber not constituted according to law, the people will refuse to
pay them; that the courts of justice will support the people in their
resistance; that if the King abolishes the courts of justice,
establishes others, and endeavours to levy the taxes by force, the army
will not support him; and that the struggle which will then take place
will be dangerous to no one except the Royalists and the King. The
strength and unanimity with which public opinion has declared itself,
renders the fulfilment of these predictions, in case the King should
endeavour to govern without a Chamber, by no means improbable.

Whether, therefore, the Ministers are to be judged by their avowed
intentions, by their personal history, by the great acts of their party,
or by its present professions, the renitency of the French nation
against their yoke is just and expedient, and their success in putting
down the manifestations of public displeasure would be one of the
greatest, but fortunately also, one of the most unlikely calamities
which could befal France and Europe.


44.: PROSPECTS OF FRANCE, I
 EXAMINER, 19 SEPT., 1830, PP. 594-5

Between the preceding item (No. 43) and this, the July Revolution had
taken place. On 26 July, urged by Peyronnet and with the agreement of
Polignac and other ministers, Charles X had issued four ordinances
curtailing drastically the liberty of the press, dissolving the newly
elected Chamber of Deputies, restricting the number of electors and the
number of Deputies, and calling for new elections (Bull. 367, Nos.
15135-8 [25 July, 1830]). He referred to the powers granted by Art. 14
of the Charter of 1814, thus confirming fears that he would use those
powers to establish personal government. Three days of riots followed;
Charles X revoked the ordinances on 30 July, but it was too late; on 31
July, Louis Philippe, duc d’Orléans, accepted the offer to become
Lieutenant-General of the realm; on 2 Aug. Charles X abdicated in favour
of his grandson; on 7 Aug. the Chamber of Deputies voted in favour of
proposals for a revised Charter, and offered the crown to Louis Philippe
on his acceptance of the new version of the Charter (Charte
constitutionnelle, Bull. 5, No. 59 [14 Aug., 1830]); and on 9 Aug., in a
simple ceremony in Edition: current; Page: [129] the presence of the
Deputies and Peers, Louis Philippe, duc d’Orléans, became Louis
Philippe, King of the French.

Mill had gone with John Arthur Roebuck (1801-79), a close friend, and
others to Paris in the week of 8 Aug., where he “laid the groundwork of
the intercourse” he was to keep up “with several of the active chiefs of
the extreme popular party” (Autobiography, CW, Vol. I, p. 179); he
returned to London in the first week of September. For his exuberant
letters from Paris extolling the Revolution and the exemplary behaviour
of the working class, which he wrote to his father (in large part
published in the Examiner) giving his impressions of the state of France
immediately after the Revolution and the first proceedings of Louis
Philippe’s government, see EL, CW, Vol. XII, pp. 54-63.

This article, headed “Prospects of France. / No. I,” is the first of a
series of seven under that title in the “Political Examiner” (see Nos.
45, 48, 50, 51, 57, and 61; No. 98 is also related). The articles are
described in Mill’s bibliography as “A series of essays entitled the
Prospects of France and signed S— in the Examiner of 19th Sept., 26th
Sept., 3d Oct., 10th Oct., 17th Oct., 14th Nov., and 28th November,
1830, in all seven numbers”

(MacMinn, p. 11).

how will the revolution terminate? This is the question, which every
person in England who reads a newspaper has asked, and still continues
to ask himself every day. But all do not ask this question in the same
spirit, nor with the same hopes and fears.

Those who feel interested in an event which changes the face of the
world, chiefly as the security of their own commercial speculations may
happen to be affected by it; and those, an equally large class, whose
sympathies with their species are of such a character, that in every
step which it takes towards the achievement of its destiny, they are
more keenly alive to the dangers which beset it, than to the glory and
the happiness towards which it is irresistibly advancing; these classes
anxiously enquire, whether there will be tranquillity?

Those who feel that tranquillity, though of great importance, is not all
in all; that a nation may suffer worse evils than excessive political
excitement; that if the French people had not valued something else more
highly than tranquillity, they would now have been the abject slaves of
a priest-ridden despot; and that when tranquillity has once been
disturbed, the best way to prevent a second disturbance is to prevent a
second disturbance from being necessary; with these persons the subject
of principal anxiety is this, Will the French establish a good
government? And grievous will be their disappointment if, when every
thing has been put to hazard, little or nothing shall prove to have been
gained.

We will endeavour to contribute such materials as are afforded by a
tolerably familiar acquaintance with the history of France for the last
forty years,1 and by Edition: current; Page: [130] recent personal
observation on the spot, towards the solution of both these questions.

We believe, then, that there will be tranquillity; that there will not
be another insurrection; and that there will be no outrages on property,
or resistance to the operations of Government in detail, but such as
will with the utmost facility be put down, and that, too, by the people
themselves, if necessary. But we are also convinced that France is
threatened at present even with a greater evil than a second
insurrection; and that if the people were to follow the advice of some
of our contemporaries, by abstaining from all political agitation, and
leaving their destinies to the quiet disposal of their present Ministers
and Chambers, they would speedily find that all they had gained by the
revolution was, to exchange a feeble despotism for a strong and durable
oligarchy.

We believe, however, that the people are becoming aware of this; that
they are beginning to understand what are the really important
securities for good government; that before long they will make their
demands heard in so loud a voice as will compel attention to them; and
that they will obtain, gradually perhaps, but certainly, the best form
of government which could continue to exist, in the present state of
society in France, and with the feelings and ideas at present diffused
among the French people.

Concurring as we do most heartily in all the demands of the popular
party in France; holding those demands, and the tone in which they are
preferred, to be not only unexceptionable but signally and laudably
moderate; we of course see no ground for the tone of alarm which a
highly influential journal suddenly assumed at the beginning of the
present week.2 The writer in the Times cannot possibly be unaware that
he is most imperfectly acquainted with the past and present state of
France, and the fact is that he hardly ever touches on the subject
without betraying gross ignorance of it. He should not therefore be in
so great a hurry to decide magisterially, that people of whom he seems
to know nothing except that they desire the dissolution of the present
Chamber, are a criminal faction. It is a besetting sin of the journal to
which we allude, that whether its opinion be founded on knowledge or
not, it fancies every man a rogue or a fool who ventures to entertain a
different one.

We can assure the writer in the Times, without hesitation, that the
dissolution of the Chamber is not desired (as he surmises) for the
purpose of abolishing the peerage and still further curtailing the
functions of the executive. There probably is not a man, certainly there
is not a party, in France, whose desire it is that the power of the
executive should be further curtailed. On the contrary, it is to the
King, Louis-Philippe, that the popular party look, with a confidence not
assumed for show, but felt in their hearts, to rid them in proper season
of a body which has shewn readiness enough to take power from the Crown,
but the greatest Edition: current; Page: [131] reluctance to give to the
people any additional securities which it can possibly withhold from
them. It is not desired that the Chamber should be immediately
dissolved. What is sought is that they should first pass a new election
law; that they should then dissolve, and give place to successors chosen
under a system of election more favourable to good government than the
present.

The whole number of persons having a right to vote at the election of
Deputies, does not exceed 88,000. We have seen it asserted that the
number of paid places in the gift of the Crown, and to which an elector
is admissible, amounts to nearly 50,000. This may be an exaggeration;
but when every proper abatement is made, the fact is indisputable that
the Government disposes of a sufficient amount of public money to
secure, without much difficulty, a majority of the electors; or, what
comes to the same thing, the electors, who, in time to come, will have
in their own hands the making or unmaking of ministries, have it in
their power to distribute the public money, in considerable shares,
among themselves and their connexions.

If it be said that, by the retrenchments about to be effected, the means
of corruption will be diminished, we answer, that by those very
retrenchments, and the accompanying remissions of taxes (the electoral
qualification being founded on the amount of taxes paid) the number of
voters will be reduced even below what it is at present. The remissions
of taxes which have taken place since 1815,3 have already diminished the
number of electors to about four-fifths of what it was when Louis XVIII
granted the Charter.

It is obvious, primâ facie, that 88,000 electors, in a population of 32
millions, constitute far too narrow a basis for a national
representation. But the strenuous and energetic resistance which this
body of electors offered to the usurpations of the late Government,
appears to have induced many persons, both in this country and in
France, to repose almost unlimited confidence in their disinterestedness
and public spirit, notwithstanding the contrary presumption founded on
their limited number.

To correct this mistake, it is only necessary to repeat an observation,
in which the English Globe, to its great honour, preceded not only the
other English, but even the French journalists. Under the late
Government the electors were not yet the governing body. The powers of
Government were substantially in the hands of the King; or at least it
was yet a question whether the King or the Chambers should be the real
sovereign. The King had not yet, like our own King, submitted himself to
the necessity of governing in concert with the body who nominate the
Chamber, and of dividing with them the produce of the taxes.
Nevertheless a king cannot reign alone. Others besides himself must
participate in his power, Edition: current; Page: [132] and in the
benefits which result from it. But the Bourbons had never had the
cunning to ally themselves with the monied class; the only portion of
the nation possessing, by the Constitution, any political rights, by the
exercise of which they could endanger the power of the sovereign. That
stupid race, who, as Bonaparte said of them, had learned nothing and
forgotten nothing,4 were incapable of conceiving one single idea save
that of returning to the old regime. Instead of uniting with the new
Aristocracy, they had the inconceivable folly to rely for support upon
an Aristocracy which had fallen into decay—which had lost all that ever
gave it either physical force or moral influence—the titled noblesse and
the Catholic hierarchy. These classes, reinforced by all whom they could
personally influence, formed but an insignificant minority of the 88,000
electors, and the whole weight of the royal power being thrown into the
scale, did not suffice to give it the preponderance. The electors would
not tolerate a Government in which they had no share, and the King,
persisting in his frantic scheme, appealed to the sword, and was
defeated.

The case is now altered. The monied class has stepped into the place
both of the King and of his allies, the emigrants and clergy. When
itself excluded from the Government, this class made common cause with
the people. Now, however, it composes the Government: and being a narrow
Oligarchy, it has the same interests with any other Oligarchy. The
people, when they made the Revolution, certainly did not intend that it
should be a mere change of masters; but those whom they have permitted
to assume the Government, have already evinced, in a variety of ways,
their desire and intention that it should be little more.

Both in France and in England, the late French revolution has been
frequently compared to the English revolution in 1688;5 and there has in
fact been up to the present time a striking similitude between the two
events. We earnestly hope that they will not resemble each other in
their final result.

The English House of Commons, under the Stuarts, was not a much more
perfect representation of the people than it is at present. Yet it
resisted the Stuarts with the utmost vigour and determination; the most
genuine representative assembly could not have evinced more. And why?
Because the House of Commons at that time had no separate interest from
the people; because it had not yet possessed itself of the powers of
government. It fought its own battle against a rival power, the people
fought theirs against a tyrannical one. The House and the people marched
together in uninterrupted harmony until the common enemy was overthrown.
Thus far the conduct of the House of Commons resembled that of the
Chamber of Deputies; yet if it had been inferred from their Edition:
current; Page: [133] intrepid conduct in opposition to tyranny, that
they were incapable of abusing the power of Government when placed in
their own hands, we have long since been taught by lamentable experience
how little foundation there would have been for such an inference.

The revolution of 1688 occurred. The changes which it produced, the new
laws which were made to limit the royal power,6 and the opinions which,
for a long time, it was the interest of the new Government to
disseminate, have practically had the effect, now acknowledged by every
body, of vesting the governing power of this country substantially in
the House of Commons. So, in France, it now substantially resides in the
Chamber of Deputies: that assembly having, in the first fortnight after
the revolution, most expeditiously abolished all those articles of the
Charter which imposed any restrictions on their power in favour of the
King;7 while they left to be decided hereafter the great questions which
relate to the securities in favour of the people against the misconduct
of the Chamber itself.

If the composition of the Chamber be retained nearly as it is, without
any material modification in the law of election, the French
constitution bids fair to be an exact copy of the English, in all except
the fraudulent pretexts and the private immorality by means of which the
latter habitually works. It will accomplish its ends without the
instrumentality of a Gatton or an East Retford,8 but the practical
results will be much the same, saving the difference in the play of the
machinery.

Where 32 millions are governed by the 88 thousand richest, the
Government is of necessity a monied oligarchy; and our own Government is
substantially of the same character. We have indeed great families who,
by the boroughs which they influence, can secure to themselves a greater
share of power and of the profits of misrule, than in proportion to
their comparative wealth. Of this blessing the French are destitute. But
even among ourselves every wealthy man is virtually a sharer in the
Government. Every man who can afford to buy land, may obtain more or
less influence in a county election; and every man who desires to have a
seat in Parliament, can always obtain one by paying the price. The power
which every rich man has thus within his reach, is equivalent to power
in possession. Though the vices of our Government are as we see them,
there is very little actual difference between the situation of a rich
man who has a vote, or the means of influencing votes, and of a rich man
who has neither one nor the other.

Edition: current; Page: [134]
The French have therefore a genuine example in our Government of the
spirit of an aristocracy of wealth, and the fruits which it bears. Let
them beware how they suffer such a Government to become consolidated
among themselves. It is because we, at our revolution, committed this
grand mistake, that we are still, after 150 years, fruitlessly demanding
parliamentary reform. The French will not be guilty of a similar error.
They will effect their parliamentary reform in two years, perhaps
sooner,—not with muskets, but with newspapers and petitions: after which
there will be “tranquillity,” if that name can be given to the intense
activity of a people which, freed from its shackles, will speedily
outstrip all the rest of the world in the career of civilization.

The organs of the English Oligarchy, the Post and the John Bull,9 never
fell into so grand a mistake as when they commenced flinging dirt
against the new Government of France. For the interest of their
employers, they should have upheld that Government by every means in
their power. They are committing the same blunder as if they were to
declaim in favour of the Jacobites, and against the present Constitution
of England and the present settlement of the Crown. The two exiled
families, and their respective supporters, are exact models of one
another, and the men now in power in France are as exact a copy as could
exist in the present day of our own politicians of 1688.

We have unavoidably contented ourselves with generalities in the present
article. In the next we shall enter into greater detail.

S—.


45.: PROSPECTS OF FRANCE, II
 EXAMINER, 26 SEPT., 1830, PP. 609-10

For the context and the entry in Mill’s bibliography, see No. 44.

the chamber of 1830 was the result of a compromise.1

A glance at the history of the last fifteen years will show what was the
nature of the compromise, and what were the motives which led to it.

From 1815 to 1830, the Government of the restored Bourbons had proceeded
in almost uninterrupted progression from bad to worse: the eighteen
months of the Martignac Ministry, a short-lived experiment on the public
forbearance, being the only intermission.2

Edition: current; Page: [135]
At every step in this downward movement, the Bourbons lost a portion of
their adherents. Recent events have made it sufficiently visible how
miserable a remnant finally remained. The very soldiers who fought
against the people, fought reluctantly, and against their private
conviction. Leave out the foreign mercenaries, leave out all whose sole
inducement was a mistaken idea of military honour, and Charles X could
not perhaps have mustered a hundred men, not priests nor emigrants, who
would voluntarily have fired a musket to save his throne.

Thus unanimous were the French, when tyranny was pushed to extremity;
when the reign of the Bourbons became incompatible with a government of
law, with the security of men’s persons against the worst excesses of
enraged and terrified power; when, if they had not been overthrown,
blood must have flowed in torrents on the scaffold, civil war would have
raged in every corner of France, and that wretched family would have
been ejected after all, or could have been maintained solely by a
despotism worse (if worse be possible) than that of the arch-despot,
Napoleon.

So striking a unanimity could not have been generated by a less potent
cause. The opposition to the Polignac Ministry was composed of the most
heterogeneous materials.

Before the feud between the restored dynasty and the people could come
to the issue which we have just witnessed—before the dynasty could have
the folly to declare war upon the people with a force insufficient to
hold out against them for three days—the dynasty had been, and must have
been, deserted, not only by all the friends of good government, but by
all the prudent and moderate supporters of bad. The Bourbons had parted
with the wisdom of the serpent as well as with the innocence of the
dove;3 and all who had not made a similar renunciation were in the
opposite ranks.

The opponents of the Polignac Ministry, though consisting, as we have
already observed, of several different shades of opinion and
inclination, may be ranged with sufficient accuracy under two great
divisions: the old opposition and the new.

At the head of the former was the ancient côté gauche: the peers,
deputies, and writers, who, in bad times as in good, in a minority of 16
as in a majority of 221,4 in the sanguinary reaction of 1815 as in the
heroic revolution of 1830, were still true to the cause of good
government and social improvement: who faithfully and unremittingly
watched over the securities, imperfect as they were, which the Charter
of Louis XVIII rather promised than afforded; who were ever at their
post to resist the jesuitical evasions of the Charter, long before Royal
audacity Edition: current; Page: [136] ventured on its open violation;
whose integrity and self-respect excluded them, as well under a Decazes5
as a Polignac, from holding office in a Government, the sole object of
which was to wield a constitutional monarchy to the ends and in the
spirit of a despotism. Such were the leaders of the old opposition. Its
followers were all the incorruptible adherents of the good old cause,
re-inforced by the thousands of high-spirited and well-educated young
men whom every year brought forward into active life, and by numbers
who, duped at first, had their eyes opened as the Bourbon Government and
the spirit of the age became more and more irreconcileable.

The leaders of the new opposition consisted, first, of the several knots
or bands of ejected placemen, who had been successively dismissed from
the councils of the restored dynasty, as the game which it was playing
came to require more skilful tricksters, or instruments of greater
daring and more devoted subserviency. Secondly, of men who, either from
personal attachment to the Bourbon family, or from a constitutional or
habitual partiality to the strongest side, adhered to the restored
Government in all its successful undertakings, and quitted it only when
its projects became such as the state of society and opinion rendered
impracticable except by force. A third class of the leaders of the new
opposition, and one which circumstances have now elevated into unusual
consequence, consisted of a school of philosophical and political
writers, pure, we believe, for the most part, from any dishonourable
ambition, and comprising in their ranks several able littérateurs and
highly accomplished men, but whose metaphysical doctrines were too
closely imitated from Scotland or Germany, and their political opinions
from those which are current among genteel people in our own island.
Like Madame de Staël,6 many of whose opinions they inherit, and with
whom their most prominent leader, the present Prime Minister of France,
is nearly connected,7 they are ardent sticklers for a representative and
constitutional government, but constitutional on the English model. They
either supported, or scarcely opposed, the Bourbon Government, when, by
the introduction of the double vote, it rendered a national
representation, already resting on too narrow a basis, still less
popular and more aristocratic than before.8 But when, by making Edition:
current; Page: [137] war to restore absolute power in Spain, by an
immoral and fraudulent management of the elections, by repeated attempts
to stifle the press, by putting down almost all places of general
education except those of the Jesuits,9—we might say by all the acts of
the Villèle Administration, the Bourbons showed themselves openly
hostile to every kind of representative government, and to every kind of
mental instruction by which men could be fitted for such a government,
or led to desire it; then the persons of whom we are speaking, being
sincere and strong enemies to the despotism of one, joined the popular
cause, to which they have rendered, on not a few important occasions,
signal service. This portion of the leaders of the new opposition have,
as forming a philosophical party or school, received the name of
doctrinaires; and, as politicians, bear no remote affinity to the
English Whigs, though not stained, like so many of that party, by
political duplicity, trick, or charlatanerie.

The above picture of the new and old opposition is probably new to most
of our countrymen; but this is merely because it is the peculiar
character of English nationality, not, like the French, to court the
admiration of foreigners, but to treat them and their concerns with
something like indifference and neglect. All who have watched the course
of French affairs for the last ten years, have witnessed the gradual
rise of the new opposition, and know that its constituent elements are
such as we have just described.

These, then, are the two great divisions of the seemingly compact and
united body which resisted the Polignac ministry, and by that resistance
brought on the great events by which the Government of the restored
dynasty has been abruptly terminated.

Of these, the old opposition predominates in the nation; but the new
opposition predominates in the Chamber of Deputies, and has had the
formation of the present ministry. This happened in consequence of the
compromise to which, as we observed in the commencement of this article,
the present Chamber owes its existence, and which we now proceed to
explain.

At the general election in 1827, and at that in 1830, the one and only
purpose of the patriotic electors was the overthrow of an
administration, whose very existence precluded the slightest hope of a
single step in social improvement, and placed in continual danger all
the institutions, and all the liberties, to which the French people were
most ardently attached. Among those who were united to Edition: current;
Page: [138] attain this paramount object, all other differences of
opinion, however important, were sunk. It was far from certain that by
any union of efforts a majority could be obtained: and to risk the
defeat of the common end for any object which admitted of postponement,
and which was impracticable if the other failed, would have been
egregious folly.

In the populous towns, where the number of voters was considerable, and
the predominance of the popular party admitted of no doubt, members
belonging to the côté gauche were returned. But in the poor, remote, and
backward provinces of France, where the voters were few in number,
composed in great part of functionaries in the pay of Government; and in
the great or departmental colleges throughout the country,—it was
uncertain whether a majority hostile to the ministry could be obtained.
To ensure such a majority, the Liberals almost always endeavoured to
select as the popular candidate an individual differing by the slightest
possible shade from the obnoxious ministers, provided he would consent
to vote against them. By any other selection they would have lost some
part of the votes which a candidate of such a character might probably
obtain; and have risked the total failure of the paramount object, the
exclusion of the ministerial candidate.

In many instances, also, the narrow limits within which the choice of
the electors was confined by the conditions of eligibility, did not
admit of their making any choice but one which very imperfectly
represented their opinion. By the terms of the Charter, half the
Deputies of a department must be chosen among the inhabitants of the
department, and the whole among persons paying at least 1000 francs
(40l.) of direct taxes to the state.10 This, in France, implies no
inconsiderable fortune, especially in the poorer departments. And when
we mention that there are no less than eight departments in which the
totality of the electors, that is, of the inhabitants paying 300 francs
or more of direct taxes, falls short of 400, it may be imagined within
what narrow bounds the electors were often restricted, in the selection
at least of that half of the deputies, whom they were compelled by law
to choose from among the inhabitants of the department.

The first which we mentioned of the causes which prevented the popular
electors from choosing the men whom the majority of them would have
preferred, did not exist in so great a degree in 1830 as in 1827. The
popular party were more completely aware of their strength, and could
reckon with confidence on a large majority in places where on the former
occasion success had been at least doubtful. A considerable proportion
of the Deputies who owed their seats to the compromise, would
consequently have been ejected from them by men of more decidedly
liberal opinions as well as of greater abilities, had not circumstances
of which it can only be necessary to remind our readers, rendered it
expedient to adopt as a universal rule, the re-election of the 221 who
had voted Edition: current; Page: [139] for the address condemning the
Polignac ministry.11 Not a few who had lost the confidence of their
constituents by their manifest incompetence as legislators, as well as
by their inadequacy as representatives of electors sympathising far more
than themselves in the feelings and wishes of a vast majority of the
French people, are indebted solely to the principle of re-electing the
221, for the advantage which they now possess of assisting in the
formation of a new Government: an advantage by no means trifling, as the
new Red Book, if the revolutionary era have as yet produced so useful a
document,12 bears ample and unequivocal testimony.

The Chamber of 1830, then, was the result of a compromise; in which, as
in all such compromises, the timid and hesitating dictated to the bold
and decisive; those least in earnest gave the law to those who were most
so. A large proportion, therefore, of the present Deputies, represent
the opinion but of a minute and impotent fraction of their constituents.
They are far from being the men whom even the present electors would
again elect, even under the existing conditions of eligibility; and
still further from being such as would be re-elected by the present
electors, if those intolerable conditions were abrogated, or so far
lowered as to leave any sufficient latitude of choice.

Can it be supposed, for example, that the centre droit, a party whose
benches in the Chamber are at present only less crowded than those of
the ministerial section, the centre gauche,—a body composed, in a great
measure, of royalists, a little, and only a little more scrupulous or
less audacious than the late ministers themselves, and many of whom
adhered to the Ministry of Villèle to a later period than the Spanish
war—can it be believed that such men would now be pitched upon by
electors freed from the usurpation of the double vote13 (which most of
those very men had a hand in fastening upon them), as fit persons to
legislate for regenerated France,—for France under a roi citoyen in lieu
of a roi cagot,14 and demanding good institutions—not a mere mitigation
of bad ones?

The present Deputies were elected for the single purpose of overthrowing
the Polignac Ministry. For that end they were admirably adapted. They
were not chosen to make laws for a regenerated nation; and fitness to
make such laws was not at all considered in the nomination of the
greater part of them. A large Edition: current; Page: [140] proportion
were re-elected for qualities the very reverse of those which the
fulfilment of such a duty would require. They were chosen because they
could not be accused of being patriots; because they did not sympathise
in the feelings of the French people; because their lives had been spent
in serving and in worshipping the Bourbons; and because they were known
to be capable of abiding by that family in all save the last extremity.

It is not wonderful that men should be in no hurry to resign their
seats, who know that this is the last time they will ever fill them.
Least of all is this wonderful, when by losing their seats they lose the
whole patronage of their department. But it would be wonderful, if any
degree of ignorance and presumption in an average English newspaper
could surprise us, that the body of the intelligent classes in France
should be treated as something approaching to rebels and traitors,
because they are eager to get rid of such a Chamber.

S—.


46.: MR. HUSKISSON AND THE JACOBIN CLUB
 EXAMINER, 26 SEPT., 1830, PP. 611-12

This article comments on rumours (see Morning Chronicle, 18 Sept., 1830,
p. 2, and 23 Sept., p. 3) about the radical background of William
Huskisson, who had died on 15 Sept., after being run over by a train.
Headed as title, this leading article in the “Political Examiner” is
identified in Mill’s bibliography, with No. 47, as “Two short leading
articles in the Examiner of 26th Sept. 1830 headed ‘Mr. Huskisson and
the Jacobin Club’ and ‘The recent Combination of the [Journeymen]
Printers in Paris’ ”

(MacMinn, p. 11).

in a discussion which has gone the round of the daily papers respecting
the very unimportant fact, whether Mr. Huskisson was or was not a member
of the Jacobin club,1 the Times remarks that a speech professing to be
delivered by him at that club, was published at Paris in 1790.2 “In the
title of the speech,” continues the Times, “Mr. Huskisson is described
as an Englishman, and a member of the société from 1789. The Right
Honorable Gentleman had most probably abandoned the society long before
it became formidable under the name of the Jacobin club, and hence he is
justified in saying that he never attended the sittings of that club but
once.”3

Edition: current; Page: [141]
“A member of the société from 1789.” This looks very much like a
translation of “membre de la société de 1789.” If so, the editor of the
Times, or his informant, is ignorant both of French and of history. Of
French, because “a member of the société from 1789,” if expressed in
that language, would stand thus, “membre de la société depuis 1789,” not
de 1789. Of history, because he apparently is not aware that there
existed a society under the name of “La Société de 1789,” more shortly
“le club de quatre-vingt-neuf,” which was established by seceders from
the Jacobin club, and in opposition to it;4 to defend the original
principles of the revolution of 1789, principles which the Jacobin club
had by its founders been intended to promote, in opposition to the more
democratic views which that club subsequently adopted.

Without pretending to peculiar sources of information, we have always
understood that Mr. Huskisson was in fact a member, not of the Jacobin
Club, but of the Club of 1789. Our belief is now confirmed, both by his
own disavowal of having ever belonged to the former society,5 and by the
apparently ill-translated and ill-understood title-page of his speech,
as referred to by the Times.


47.: THE RECENT COMBINATION OF JOURNEYMEN PRINTERS AT PARIS
 EXAMINER, 26 SEPT., 1830, P. 612

This leader is in response to articles such as those in The Times, 8
Sept., p. 4, 10 Sept., p. 2, 11 Sept., p. 2, and 18 Sept., p. 2. The
printers of Paris had petitioned the Chamber of Deputies against
mechanical printing presses, and when the printers at the Imprimerie
Nationale were asked on 1 Sept. to print the order for money to repair
the mechanical presses of the Royal Printing House smashed on 29 July,
they refused. At a meeting of printers on 3 Sept. a resolution was taken
not to work on mechanized presses and consequently some newspapers
failed to appear on 3 and 4 Sept. On 4 Sept. Lafayette told the
committee of the printers that such combinations of workmen were
illegal, and they issued instructions to return to work. Nonetheless
fifteen were arrested. On 14 Sept. they appeared before the Tribunal of
Correction and were all acquitted. This leading article, following No.
46 in the “Political Examiner,” is headed as title. For the entry in
Mill’s bibliography see No. 46.

the alarms which have been propagated in England on the subject of this
combination were almost entirely groundless.—The workmen, indeed, like
many persons of far higher rank and greater acquirements than
themselves, fell Edition: current; Page: [142] into the mistake of
supposing that machinery, in certain cases at least, was injurious to
the general interest, and should be prohibited by law. They accordingly
refused to work for those newspaper proprietors who persisted in the
employment of steam presses. The strike was an offence under the
iniquitous combination laws, which still subsist in France, though
abolished in England.1 With this exception, the workmen violated no law.
The committee which they appointed, immediately issued a placard,
formally disavowing all intention of compassing their end by violence or
intimidation. No force was employed against the proprietors of
newspapers; and if, for one or at most two days, several newspapers did
not appear, it was merely because they had not yet procured workmen, to
replace those who had left off work. In three days, at the utmost,
affairs resumed their accustomed course, and from that time the
newspapers have ceased even to allude to the subject.

We subjoin in confirmation of the above facts, the verdict of the
Tribunal of Correctional Police, acquitting the members of the
committee:

Considering that,—if it is proved that the committee of the journeymen
printers who met at the Barrière du Maine entered into an engagement, by
which the journeymen bound themselves not to work in work-shops where
there are mechanical presses, and that the meeting therefore assumed the
character of an illegal combination, such as is contemplated and
prohibited in articles 415 and 416 of the penal code,—it is at the same
time proved by the speeches of counsel, and in particular by the
explanations given at the trial by the civil and military authorities
present at the deliberation, that the committee acted only with a view
to preserve order, and in the immediate presence of the authorities;

That, if additions appear to have been made to the resolution
subsequently to the moment at which it was carried, this seems to have
been the effect of a mistake made by the members of the meeting
respecting the extent of their rights;

That the men returned to their work almost immediately, and that the
members of the committee, when properly informed on the nature of their
rights, recommended to their companions to resume their occupations;

That, if these various circumstances, taken together, do not destroy the
fact of the commission of the offence, they at least preclude the
supposition of any criminal intention, which intention is the basis of
the offences designated by the law;

The Court discharges the accused parties, without costs.2


48.: PROSPECTS OF FRANCE, III
 EXAMINER, 3 OCT., 1830, PP. 626-7

For the background, heading, and bibliographical entry, see No. 44. This
article is the first in Mill’s Somerville College set in which he has
inked in corrections in the margin. Edition: current; Page: [143] At
145.39-40 “authority in power” is changed to “persons in authority”; in
the next number of the Examiner, 10 Oct., p. 644, this correction
appears in an Erratum note.

a contest is commencing—and if it be a prolonged, it will doubtless be
an acrimonious one—between the majority of the Chamber of Deputies and
the majority of the French nation.

By the majority of the nation we do not here mean the absolute majority,
but the most numerous portion of those who as yet take any part or
concern in the struggle. A numerical majority of the entire population
are undoubtedly quiescent. The agitation has not yet penetrated so deep.
Among the working, (we may call them also the fighting) classes, there
is, or was very lately, but one feeling; satisfaction at having achieved
the overthrow of a bad government, and confidence, that without their
intervention, and by persons more instructed, and having better means of
judging than themselves, the constitution will be resettled—in a manner
the precise nature of which they do not attempt to predict, but which
they feel no doubt will be duly considered, and against which if they
should see any reasonable objections, they will be at liberty to
propound them. We do not believe that the anticipations or reflections
of the great mass of the people of Paris go farther. Any deliberate
disregard of their interests, to a degree which would call upon them for
further armed resistance, we do not imagine to have once entered into
their conceptions. For years past they have been accustomed to hear
their sentiments proclaimed, and expression given to their political
wants, by the almost unanimous voice of the instructed class. They have
not lost their feeling of reliance upon that class: to it the present
Ministry, and the adversaries of the present Ministry, alike belong; and
in its hands they are willing to leave the decision of the dispute,
believing, with a conviction in which we participate, that no government
which is, or can be, established in France, will have power to resist
the deliberate opinion of the educated part of the public, strongly
expressed.

The struggle which is commencing is between the majority of the Chambers
and the majority of the educated class; the majority in numbers, in
talents, in activity, we believe even in property; and including almost
all among the class in easy circumstances, who, in the three memorable
days, made any exertions or exposed themselves to any danger in the
common cause.

Such being the disputants, it remains to be shewn what is the point at
issue. Let no one dream that it is a mere question of who shall be in or
out. In our late remarks on the composition of the Chamber of 1830,1 we
sufficiently settled the question of the unfitness of the present men,
but unfitness of men is an evil only in proportion to the unfitness of
their probable acts. There is a fundamental difference, pregnant with
important consequences, between the practical principles of the persons
now in power, and those of their opponents.

Edition: current; Page: [144]
The doctrine of the present Chamber and of the Ministry of its choice
is, that, the Revolution having been a defensive act, provoked by an
attempt to destroy the established Constitution; the existing Charter
having been its rallying word, and the maintenance of that Charter its
direct object, the people have now obtained this, and ought to be
satisfied. Those modifications in the Charter (they add) which the
meditations of enlightened men had prepared, and which public opinion
had sanctioned, were made by the Chamber, in the first week of its
existence, and were assented to by Louis Philippe as the condition of
his elevation to the throne. This doctrine respecting the late
alterations in the Charter has been several times proclaimed (on one
memorable occasion in words of which ours are almost a translation) by
Deputies belonging to the majority, and in particular by the two
Ministers who take the lead in the Cabinet, and who have the most
completely identified themselves with the party predominant in the
Chamber.2

The first part of their case, as presented by themselves, they have
saved their opponents the trouble of refuting, by making an assertion
which is inconsistent with it. For if there were alterations in the
Charter, respecting the propriety of which the public mind was so
maturely made up as to admit of their being carried into effect after a
deliberation of two days, without even the forms which are never
departed from in the enactment of an ordinary law, it is a proof that,
although the Charter was the war cry, and its violation the immediate
incentive to resistance, it was not to the Charter, as such, that the
people were attached, nor was its maintenance all that they desired.
What the people wanted was, securities for good government. If those
which the Charter affords, as at present modified, are sufficient, they
are in the wrong in wishing for others; but let not this question be got
rid of by a side-wind. The whole matter turns upon this. Any argument
which does not go to this single point is foreign to the dispute.

But before we state what are the securities for good government which
the people would prefer to those afforded by the modified Charter, it is
hardly possible to avoid taking some notice of an argument, which,
although it would be just as available in behalf of one set of
institutions as of another, is yet well adapted to make an impression on
certain minds, as it consists of a phrase. The current phrase in the
mouths of the partisans of the Chamber is, that it is desirable the
revolution should stop. This maxim finds favour in the eyes both of
those to whom the word revolution is synonymous with insecurity, and of
those who, without considering the radical distinction between the two
periods, remember that in the days of their fathers the first revolution
was succeeded by a second, and the second by a third, until, wearied and
without hope, the French people surrendered themselves willing slaves to
a military despotism.

Edition: current; Page: [145]
In answer to the profession of a desire to terminate the revolution, the
majority of the nation reply, that if by the revolution be meant the
fighting in the streets, it is already terminated, and no circumstances
but such as are greatly to be deprecated ought, or are likely, to lead
to its renewal. Such means, it is to be hoped, will never again be
necessary, either for the attainment or for the maintenance of good
government: and unless indispensable for that end, nothing that could
possibly occur would warrant so hazardous an expedient. But to join
heartily in the wish that the revolution may stop, is not quite the same
thing as to admit that the political institutions which existed before
the revolution are to remain without any material improvement, or that
those, whose sole object is that the defects still remaining in the
Constitution may be corrected in the mode prescribed by the Constitution
itself, are to be deemed sufficiently answered by having it thrown in
their teeth that they wish to continue the revolution, when it is time
the revolution should terminate.

It is speciously urged that the present moment is a moment of
excitement, and that such times are improper for discussing and maturing
great constitutional changes. The popular party do not deny this. They
allow that a state of violent excitement is one which no rational and
well-intentioned person would voluntarily choose for a work requiring
slow and calm deliberation. It is for this very reason that they implore
the Government not to delay the deliberation until the excitement is
such as to be incompatible with slowness and clamness. That it has yet
become so, they deny, and deny truly. That it will become so in a few
months, if the demands of the reasonable part of the public be not
complied with, one must be blind not to see. When justice and the public
interest demand the concession of a foot, it is wretched policy to
refuse the people an inch lest they should take an ell. Give the entire
foot with a good grace: if you withhold what you yourselves think
reasonable till it is torn from you by main force, where are you to find
moral strength for resisting pretensions of questionable expediency? The
people may have confidence in those who obviously intend their good. But
they must be idiots if they placed reliance in men who refuse them
justice, for fear lest injustice should come of it.

To return, however, to the doctrine that times of political excitement
are unfit times for constitutional reforms; we ask, is it possible to
cite one single example of constitutional reforms effected in times
which are not times of excitement? Reforms in the Government are not
what the Government itself is apt spontaneously to originate. When the
public are quiet and satisfied, it is not, we may be sure, the persons
in possession of power, who will voluntarily come forward to point out
faults in the political arrangements which have placed the power in
their hands. Popular excitement is the natural indication to persons in
authority, that a general wish exists for something which is conceived
to be an improvement. It is their duty to defer to that wish by a solemn
deliberation, which shall testify that the cause of the people was not
prejudged in advance, and Edition: current; Page: [146] shall give hopes
that what is now withheld will, if reasonable, be granted, when
experience and discussion shall have overcome the scruples of its
opponents. It is the duty of the Government to do this, before
excitement has grown into passion, wishes into demands, and friendly
remonstrance into clamorous hostility.

Those who accuse the popular party of wishing for another revolution,
are accused in their turn by that party of not understanding the meaning
nor entering into the spirit of the revolution which has already taken
place. It is insisted on by the popular newspapers, and re-echoed by
thousands in conversation, that the Chamber mistakes the grande semaine
for a mere change of ministry, and fancies it does enough if it gives to
France in 1830, all that France called for in 1829;3 forgetting that a
revolution carries society farther on its course, and makes greater
changes in the popular mind, than half a century of untroubled
tranquillity. Why were the demands of the people in 1829 so much more
moderate than at present? Because what is now past was then to come, and
might have been avoided. They asked for as much as they thought could be
obtained without a revolution; and with this, rather than draw the
sword, they would have been satisfied. What, however, they were content
rather to forego, than to purchase at so terrible a price, it does not
follow that they are not disposed to claim now when the price has been
paid. The bonds of law and government have been broken, and all the
perils incurred, to avert which mankind are content to sacrifice their
most cherished wishes. France is entitled to require, that one such
convulsion, one such dissolution and reconstruction of the machine of
society, shall suffice. Proportioned to the fearful dangers of a violent
revolution, would be the moral responsibility of those, by whose fault
they who have braved those dangers should have braved them in vain. It
is of the utmost importance that what is done now should be done once
for all. The field is now open; wait but a little while, and it will
again be hedged in by the barrier of an established constitution. The
questions, on the solution of which by the French people their future
good government will depend, must be now agitated, must be now decided.
Let it be attempted so to decide them that it shall not be necessary
again to unsettle them in a year to come. To have turned out one bad
government would be a poor equivalent for all the blood which has been
shed, if the same operation, in one, or two, or fifty years, should have
to be performed again upon another. For the sake even of tranquillity
itself, the present is the time so to settle the constitution, that the
bad government now happily got rid of shall be the last.

How little there is to inspire terror or mistrust, in the means by which
the popular party proposes to accomplish this end, will be seen in the
ensuing paper.4

S—.

Edition: current; Page: [147]


49.: ANSWER TO BOWRING’S CRITICISM OF PROSPECTS OF FRANCE, II
 EXAMINER, 3 OCT., 1830, P. 627

Immediately following “Prospects of France, III” (No. 48) in the
Examiner of 3 Oct., p. 627, is a letter from John Bowring (1792-1872), a
disciple of Bentham who had been chosen by him to edit the Westminster
Review; his relations with the two Mills had become difficult in the
late 1820s, and they had both withdrawn from the Westminster. Bowring’s
letter, commenting on No. 45, is dated from 5, Millman Street, 27 Sept.,
1830, and headed “To the Editor of the Examiner”:

The grounds of the unpopularity of the French Chamber of Deputies are
obvious. It does not represent the Revolution. The Revolution was the
work of the young—of the unopulent. The Chamber has no individual of
either of these classes among its members—nor was there one among the
electors of the Deputies.

I am greatly surprised that so intelligent a writer as S. should
denominate the Chamber of 1830 “the result of a compromise.” Nothing can
be farther from the fact. The Chamber of 1830 consisted of the best men
that could be found in the narrow circle of the qualified candidates,
wherever popular opinion had any—the slightest—preponderance. The
electors did all they could in these circumstances; and in no case, that
I know of, did they take a worse where they could have returned a better
man. The honor that belongs to them they should be allowed to bear; and
it cannot, I think, be denied, that, considering the numerous
limitations on the expression of the will of the electors, the Chamber
of 1830 was a tolerably fair representation of the elective body.

But the ground of complaint, of just and reasonable complaint, lies far
deeper. Not more than one individual in three hundred exercises any
proportion of the elective franchise, in France. Deduct two-thirds for
women, children, &c., and still not one in a hundred has a voice in the
constitutive power of the country. That is, indeed, a grievance,
severely and widely felt; and, till some steps are taken for its
redress, it is desirable that discontent should find expression. I do
not mean that a universal, or even a very extended, suffrage is demanded
by the men of the revolution. The beautiful machinery of the ballot will
extract public opinion from a comparatively small portion of society. If
the number of electors were quadrupled, I think that would for the
present satisfy the French people.

I never have heard from well-informed electors that their “sole object,”
in the late election, was to upset an “obnoxious ministry:” such
narrowness of purpose would have done little credit to their sagacity.
Still less that the “liberal electors” sought the candidate who
“differed the slightest shade possible from the obnoxious ministers.”
There were—and I speak from pretty extensive intercourse with the
electors of France—no such delicately spun refinements. The electors did
the best they could; and I doubt the possibility of your intelligent
correspondent’s producing a single instance where the liberals—for it is
they who are accused of “compromise”—returned a member because he
“differed the slightest shade possible from the obnoxious ministers.”

That the Chamber is unworthy to represent, and unwilling to develope,
the Revolution is, to me, perfectly obvious; that the opinion of a
hundred new representatives, many of whom will be chosen from among the
young, will greatly improve its character, and liberalize its
proceedings, is also clear; that the removal of the corrupt influence of
the Polignac administration would tend to the rejection of an immense
number of the present Deputies, I hold to be indisputable. The king,
whose pride it is to be the king of the people, ought not to delay that
appeal to the people which is loudly called for. Among the Doctrinaires,
the Whigs, and the Aristocracy of France, there are, for him, many
pitfalls and precipices; his strength and his security can only be
established by his most intimate alliance with the nation. The
reluctance of the Deputies to return to their constitutents, grows out
of their knowledge that their constituents will now find better
servants: and it is truly a grief and a grievance that the “triumphant
nation” is not allowed to choose them.

This letter is in turn followed by an editorial comment, “We have
communicated the above letter to our correspondent S—, who has furnished
us with the following Edition: current; Page: [148] observations in
reply:”, which introduces Mill’s unheaded reply on the same page. Mill’s
English quotations are from Bowring’s letter. This item is not found in
Mill’s bibliography, but the circumstances mark it as certainly his.

it rests with those who know the fact, to pronounce whether it accords
with the statement of your other correspondent or with mine. The
expression I made use of is not of my own invention, it is a literal
translation from the express words of the French popular newspapers.
Which of them has not reiterated, again and again, the expression, “La
Chambre de 1830, fut le résultat d’une transaction”; and sometimes, “Le
résultat d’une foule de transactions.”1 The assertion that the Chamber
was elected for the sole purpose of overthrowing the Polignac Ministry,
has been repeated by the same newspapers almost to tiresomeness. Nor
does such narrowness of purpose, when fairly considered, reflect any
discredit on the electors. The overthrow of the Ministry being the
condition on which every thing depended, no sacrifice could have been
too great which helped to render it more sure. The people universally
felt the importance of re-electing the 221, who, it is notorious, were
preferred in cases where even the “narrow circle of the qualified
candidates” would have afforded persons in all other respects more
acceptable to the majority of the electors.

Your correspondent appears not perfectly to have seized the nature of
the “compromise” which was stated to have taken place. He denies that
the “Liberals” made any compromise; but who, permit me to ask, are the
Liberals? If he accounts all such who were enemies of the late Ministry,
undoubtedly they made no compromise with its friends. But the majority
of them made—and it is matter of praise, not of blame to them—a
compromise with the minority. They elected, not the best man who could
be got, but the best who could be sure of uniting all their suffrages;
throwing thus the nomination into the hands of that portion of the
opposition which differed least from the obnoxious Ministry, wherever
there was any chance that the votes of that section of the electors
might have it in their power to decide the majority. In the large towns,
where the really popular party could afford to dispense with the
assistance of semi-liberals, and to which places the enquiries of your
correspondent have probably been confined, there was no compromise,
because none was necessary. The electors did choose the best men who
could be found among the persons legally eligible. But this is no more
than I had previously asserted, in the paper to which that of your
correspondent is a reply.

It is scarcely necessary to add that I fully concur in your
correspondent’s estimate of the importance of extending the elective
franchise; and I can most Edition: current; Page: [149] confidently add
my testimony to his, concerning the very moderate extension which would
at present content even the most dissatisfied of the French people.


50.: PROSPECTS OF FRANCE, IV
 EXAMINER, 10 OCT., 1830, PP. 641-4

The significance of this article for Mill is seen in his recalling in a
letter to Tocqueville of 11 Dec., 1835, the argument here and in Nos.
174 and 177 for the representative rather than the delegative
responsibility of elected Deputies (EL, CW, Vol. XII, p. 288). For the
context and entry in Mill’s bibliography, see No. 44.

to complete the design with which this series of papers was undertaken,
it remains to explain to our readers the demands of the popular party,
with some statement of the grounds on which they are founded.

Perhaps it will rather be expected of us that we should commence by
stating what these demands are not, than what they are.

The popular party does not demand a republican government. Every one who
is au courant of the present state of opinion in France, will affirm
that not only there is no party, but possibly not a single individual,
who indulges even a wish to disturb the settlement of the crown. Those
of our contemporaries in whose daily and weekly columns a republican
party figures as the prime mover in all the opposition to the present
ministry and chamber, have contrived with singular infelicity to miss
the matter.1 Are they so ignorant, both of France and of common sense,
as not to know that the sovereignty of the people does not mean
republicanism? Since they are so ill informed of its meaning, we will
tell them what it does mean. So far as kingship is concerned, it means
simply this—that kings shall be first magistrates, and nothing more:
which being the admitted doctrine of the British constitution, and
literally realized, as it would be easy to shew, in the practice of the
British government, stands sufficiently exculpated, we may be permitted
to assume, from the imputation of being a republican principle. It is
true that the king, with us, is the chief magistrate of an oligarchy; a
form of government which, we must needs admit, the partisans of the
“sovereignty of the people” cannot abide. But what offends them is the
oligarchy, not the king; the monopoly by a few, exempt from all
responsibility, of the substantial powers of the government; not the
titles or privileges of the functionary who is its nominal head.

The phrase, sovereignty of the people, is, in our opinion, by no means
free from objections; though it expresses, we are aware, just as much,
and no more, as the maxim transmitted from generation to generation in
Whig toasts, that the Edition: current; Page: [150] people are the
source of all legitimate power.2 We regret as much as it is possible for
any one to do, the habit which still prevails in France of founding
political philosophy on this and similar abstractions; of which the
cause of popular governments stands in no need, and from the
misapplications of which that cause sustains great injury. The
demonstrable impossibility of practical good government without the
control of the people, is all the reason which we require to convince us
that the people ought to have the control. When, under the name of
divine right, an original title, independent of all considerations of
public good, was set up in behalf of monarchs, the friends of liberty
naturally reverted to the origin of political society, for the purpose
of exposing the imposture. Just opinions on such a subject have this
use, that they prevent the mischievous influence of erroneous ones. But
the question, in what manner governments may have originated, is
henceforth an idle one: the sole business of ourselves is to adapt them
to the exigencies of society as at present constituted.

Considered as a practical principle, the sovereignty of the people is
moreover susceptible of a mischievous interpretation, though a different
one from that which is put upon it by our sapient journalists. It
countenances the notion, that the representatives of the people are to
the people in the relation of servants to a master, and that their duty
is merely to ascertain and execute the popular will: whereas the proper
object of comparison is the office of a guardian, who manages the
affairs of his ward, subject only to his own discretion, but is bound by
a severe responsibility to exercise that discretion for the interest of
his ward, and not for that of himself individually. The true idea of a
representative government is undoubtedly this, that the deputy is to
legislate according to the best of his own judgment, and not according
to the instructions of his constituents, or even to the opinion of the
whole community. The people are entitled to be secured against the abuse
of his trust. This they can not be, unless he is subject to re-election
by them, or by a numerous committee of them, at short intervals. But
inasmuch as they have chosen him, it is an allowable presumption that
they judged him to be a wiser man than themselves, and that therefore it
is at least as likely, when there is a difference of opinion, that he
should be in the right, as that they should. The elector who declares by
his vote that he deems A.B. the fittest man to make laws for his
country, and who presumes at the same time to give instructions to A.B.,
lays claim for himself to a superiority of knowledge and intellect which
it is not very likely should be possessed by him so often as once in a
hundred times; and to entitle every elector to make the same assumption,
the man whom they have chosen their representative must be not the
wisest, but the most ignorant and incapable of Edition: current; Page:
[151] them all. Now this misapprehension of the true character of
popular governments is manifestly promoted, by applying to those
governments, or to the principle on which they are founded, the
designation “sovereignty of the people.”

But the phrase, though it disguises the real foundation of good
government, and admits of the practical misapplication which we have
just pointed out, admits, so far as we can perceive, of no other; and we
do not believe that it is thus misapplied by the French of the present
day, though it was by their predecessors, the Jacobins. The truth is,
that the phrase itself, though it would probably be placed by most
Frenchmen at the head of a treatise on the foundation of government, is
little used in the actual strife of parties, except as an equivalent
expression to the negation of divine right. Thus, they say that the
Revolution of 1830 has firmly established as the basis of the French
constitution, the sovereignty of the people; meaning that it has rooted
out the principle of legitimacy or divine right, since the king, not
owing his throne to a hereditary title, but having been called to it by
the people themselves, is precluded for ever from setting up any other
claim to the powers which he possesses or may possess, than their
expediency. A similar boast was made at our Revolution of 1688, and
continued to be repeated until our aristocracy became more afraid of the
people than they were of the king.

When the Times newspaper expressed its apprehensions, that the party
which sought the dissolution of the Chamber of Deputies aimed at a more
extensive application of the “sovereignty of the people,” by abolishing
the Peers, and curtailing the powers of the executive, it displayed
great ignorance. The sovereignty of the people—even according to the
mistaken application above noticed, which makes the people the judges of
every individual measure—does not mean that the people should not have
Peers, and a strong executive, but merely that they should not have them
unless they like: which, we beg to assure the Times, is not exactly the
same thing.

We are firmly convinced, that not merely the greater part, but the
whole, of the French nation, do wish to have Peers, and an executive
strong enough to compel obedience to the laws. Their peerage would not
indeed be a hereditary peerage, but one which, as we shall shew, would
be more powerful, and more independent even of public opinion, than the
present House of Peers, or any hereditary body which could be created in
France. As for the throne, we are persuaded that, except the few
partisans of the exiled family, there is not a man in France, who, if he
could overturn it by a wish, would not leave it where it stands. We
speak from considerable opportunities of observation, both among the
more active and influential of the young men who now head the popular
party, and among the patriots of more established character and more
mature years. From the latter, and especially from those who had
opportunities of intercourse with the King, we heard nothing but
eulogiums on the personal Edition: current; Page: [152] character and
public inclinations both of himself and of his heir apparent.3 The
younger men, even those in active hostility to the present ministry,
declared that if it had depended solely upon them, they would have
raised Louis Philippe to the throne, not before, indeed, but after, the
reform of the constitution. Yet these men had no partiality to a
monarchy. Almost all Frenchmen resemble republicans in their habits and
feelings, but these are republicans in their opinions. They think,—how
should they help thinking?—that the progress of events, and of the human
mind, is leading irresistibly towards republicanism. They would rejoice,
if they thought their country sufficiently advanced to be capable of
such a government. But they are convinced that republican institutions
would neither be understood nor relished by the mass of the French
people. The transition would be too sudden, and would find their minds
unprepared. The habits of obedience, formed under a kingly government,
could not be all at once transferred to a republican one. They would
have no clear conception either of the rights which it conferred, or of
the obligations which it imposed. Former reminiscences, instead of
guiding, would serve only to alarm them. We are well assured that most
of the addresses from the departments,4 signifying their adherence to
the new other of things, testify a kind of horror at the very idea of a
republic: and what wonder, when in the minds of the writers it is solely
associated with the régime of the proconsuls of the Convention? For
these reasons, the speculative republicans, though numerous among the
educated class at Paris, and especially among the young men who bore
arms in the Revolution, made a complete sacrifice of their republican
opinions, and joined heartily in giving effect to the wish of the
majority. The conduct of Lafayette was worthy of his previous life.
Already, in the former Revolution, he had in like manner renounced his
individual inclinations, and though a republican, made sacrifices,
greater than which never were made by man, to prevent the establishment
of a republic. Nor do we believe that any one of these pure-minded men
repents of his acquiescence. We are sure that, even if such a one there
be, he would consider the disturbance of the settlement, now when it is
definitively made, to be among the highest of crimes.

But the republicans, even such as we have described, form a very small
fraction of the party opposed to the ministry. Of the fifteen or sixteen
daily newspapers published in Paris, all except four are in the interest
of the popular party: the ministerial party has only two; the remaining
two belong to the old royalists.5 The two ministerial papers are the
Journal des Débats, which Edition: current; Page: [153] supported even
Villèle until M. de Chateaubriand was turned out of place, and the
Messager des Chambres, which was set up by the Martignac ministry, and
was its organ. The same disproportion in numbers between the opposition
and the supporters of the ministry, which is seen in the newspapers, is
seen every where else; except in the chambers, and perhaps in the timid
portion of the monied class. The opposition, however, may be stiled “His
Majesty’s opposition.” It does not include the King in its
disapprobation of the ministry. We have heard it affirmed in mixed
society, oftener than we can venture to state, that the King is in
advance both of the ministers and of the chamber; and we once heard the
assertion, that the King, Lafayette, and Dupont de l’Eure,6 were the
only real liberals in France. Why then, it may be asked, does not the
King dismiss his ministry? The public feel confidence that he will do
so, whenever he shall become convinced that such is their deliberate
wish: and it would be scarcely reasonable to require that he should do
it sooner.

Having stated what the popular party do not demand, we have to state as
briefly as is compatible with the degree of explanation necessary for
making the statement intelligible, what their demands really are.—They
are comprised under the four following heads:—

-   

    1. The conditions of eligibility.
-   

    2. Those of the elective franchise.
-   

    3. Municipal institutions.
-   

    4. The peerage.

In the first place, the popular party demand the entire abrogation of
all restrictions on eligibility.

The nation, they say, must be wonderfully backward in civilization, or
you, its legislators, must be singularly unacquainted with the nation,
if you cannot find in all France a body of electors whom you yourselves
dare trust with the right of choosing whatever deputies they please. A
law to confine the selection of legislators to a narrow class, when not
only you cannot be sure that the fittest men will always form part of
that class, but when you may be sure that they generally will not, is a
clumsy attempt to create an aristocracy in spite of electors who you
suppose would not make themselves the instruments of such an attempt if
they could help it. There ought to be no conditions of eligiblity except
the confidence of the electors: if your electors are not fit to be
trusted, it is your business to find others who are. Bad electors will
find the means of electing bad deputies, under any restrictions which
you will dare to impose upon their choice. But good electors will not
always be able to choose good deputies, if you compel them to select
from a small number of the richest men. Is it so easy a matter to
Edition: current; Page: [154] find men qualified for legislation? Are
the ablest and most instructed men usually to be met with among the
richest? Is it the natural tendency of riches, and of the habits which
they engender, to produce vigorous intellects, stored with knowledge and
inured to laborious thought? We say nothing of sinister interest; we
assume that in the class of qualified candidates the electors will
always be able to find the requisite number of individuals, sufficiently
accessible to motives of a more generous kind, to prefer the good of the
whole above the separate interest of the rich. Yet this is assuming far
too much, considering within what narrow limits the choice is confined,
by the high pecuniary qualification, coupled with the condition that one
half the deputies must be residents in the department where they are
chosen.

To pass from these general considerations, to others more specially
applicable to the present situation of France:—the adjustment of the
qualification of candidates involves the entire question between the
gerontocracy and the young men.

The youngest of the present deputies must have been in his twenty-fifth
year, at the first return of the Bourbons. There probably is not another
example in history of so marked and memorable a disparity between one
generation and that immediately succeeding it, as exists between the
generation to which the deputies belong, and that which has risen to
manhood during the last sixteen years.

The government under which a large majority of the deputies received
their early impressions, was not merely a despotism; no other despotism
which we have known applied so great a power, or applied it so
systematically, to the purpose of degrading the human mind. Not only was
the press and every other channel of public discussion inexorably
closed, but even in private society, to converse with any freedom on
public affairs, was to incur imminent danger of being denounced to the
police. All scientific pursuits, but such as had a direct bearing upon
the military art, or as contributed to procure the sinews of war, were
treated with the most marked discouragement. In particular, all
enquiries into the first principles of the moral sciences, as well as
all preference of political opinion to personal interest, were, under
the name of idéologie, the object of avowed contempt and aversion to the
low-minded adventurer to whom circumstances had given unlimited power
over the French people; and the elimination from the Institute of the
department “Sciences Morales et Politiques,” was but one specimen among
a thousand of the spirit of his government.7 The very infants were
taught to lisp passive obedience, and such was the purpose which
dictated the only innovations made by Bonaparte in the catechisms of the
priests,8 in whose hands, with a keen perception of the fitness Edition:
current; Page: [155] of such instruments for his end, he replaced the
management of education.9 So acutely, indeed, was he alive to the
dangers to which governments such as his are liable from the virtues of
mankind, that he is well known to have looked with an evil eye on public
functionaries who saved money in his service, because it rendered them
less dependant on their places, and less fearful of risking his
displeasure. A man who was always in want of money, suited him above all
others: of such men he might always be sure.

Putting aside the selfishness, the paltry ambition, the rage of
place-hunting, the pliability of conscience, which were the natural
out-growth of such a government; it is not very surprising that men who
were trained, and passed the best years of their lives, at a time when
the human intellect was chained up, should be a puny race. To read their
debates is all that is required in order to be satisfied of the
prodigious inferiority of their best men to the best men of the
generation which preceded them. Where are now the Adrien Duports, the
Thourets, the Alexandre Lameths, the Lepelletier Saint-Fargeaus, of the
Constitutent Assembly?10 Need we go farther back, and ask, where are the
Gournays and the Turgots?11 M. de Talleyrand, a venerable name, had his
political honesty been on a par with his intellect, is all that survives
of that constellation of remarkable men, by which the early period of
the first French Revolution was rendered illustrious.12 Would these men
have been taken Edition: current; Page: [156] unprepared, and found
without a single fixed idea, by events which laid open before them a
wider field for legislative improvement than they had expected? Read the
discussions in the Constituent Assembly on questions of detailed
legislation, and you will learn the difference between the men of the
Revolution and those of the Restoration. What other men has the present
assembly to be compared even with those of its own members who already
figured in the latter period of the first Revolution, with Benjamin
Constant and Daunou?13

But if the men of forty and upwards, speaking of them as a class, are as
poor in intellect and attainments as fifteen years of training under the
despotism of Bonaparte could make them, the case is far different with
that jeune France, of which, as long ago as 1820, Benjamin Constant and
other orators of the côté gauche boasted as of a generation who would
far surpass their fathers.14 The men who are now between twenty and
thirty-five years of age, have received the strongest and most durable
of their early impressions under comparatively free institutions. During
the period in which they were educated, political discussion has been
free, and books have multiplied to an extent and with a rapidity which
surprised the French themselves when the particulars were brought before
them by Count Daru.15 The young men have also enjoyed the advantage (it
is no trifling one) of living under a government from which they could
not, without becoming infamous, accept of place. Being excluded,
therefore, from all means of obtaining distinction without the trouble
of deserving it, they devoted themselves to serious studies; and (to say
nothing of their immense superiority in the higher virtues, above the
generation which preceded them), it is among them alone that fit
successors will be found in point of intellect, to the best men whom
France has produced in the former periods of its history.

By the existing conditions of eligibility, these men are excluded from
the Edition: current; Page: [157] chamber. It is true that the limit in
respect of age has been lowered from forty to thirty:16 but the
pecuniary qualification operates as effectually in excluding the young,
as in excluding the poor. In a country like France, where fortunes are
generally small, and where the law of equal partibility17 commonly
prevents them from descending undiminished to posterity, it is seldom
that a man has attained the prescribed degree of wealth before he
attains what was originally the necessary age.

In this point of view, therefore, it is even of greater importance than
it at first appears, that the qualification for eligibility, if not
abrogated, should be greatly reduced. There is another reason of no less
moment, which we proceed to mention.

During the last ten years, England has been occupied, with laudable,
though not with consistent, good sense, in liberalizing her commercial
policy. The conduct of France has been so different from this, that
within the same period her commercial legislation, already bad, has been
rendered immeasurably worse.18 In addition to the evils common to all
restrictive systems, of rendering commodities scarce and dear by forcing
the labour and capital of the community to employ themselves in a less
instead of a more beneficial employment, the tariff of 182219 is justly
chargeable with all the inconvenience and injustice which among
ourselves has been imputed to free trade—that of violently altering the
channels of industry, and ruining particular classes of producers for
the benefit of others. France, thanks to its restrictive laws, has
scarcely any external trade; and the vine-growers have been reduced to
penury, in order that M. Roy, M. Hyde de Neuville, and a few others
having the monopoly of the home market secured to the produce of their
vines and of their forests, might accumulate immense fortunes.20 Now, in
a great number of departments, such men as M. Edition: current; Page:
[158] Roy and M. Hyde de Neuville are the only men who pay a sufficient
amount of direct taxes to be eligible to the chamber. In France there
are very few large territorial properties which do not consist of vines
or of forests. The vine-growers and the consumers together, have never
been a match in the Chamber of Deputies, as at present constituted, for
the parties interested in a restricted trade. There will never be a free
and abundant interchange of commodities between England and France,
until the conditions of eligibility are lowered.

The statement and justification of the remaining constitutional changes
which the popular party contend for, must be postponed to a succeeding
paper.

S—.


51.: PROSPECTS OF FRANCE, V
 EXAMINER, 17 OCT., 1830, PP. 660-1

For the context and entry in Mill’s bibliography, see No. 44.

we shall now pass to the demands of the popular party on the three
remaining points—the elective franchise, municipal institutions, and the
peerage.

We suppose it is scarcely necessary to prove that the destinies of
thirty-two millions ought not to be under the absolute control of
eighty-eight thousand, or rather of about thirty thousand; for as the
poorest and least populous departments are those which return, in
proportion to the number of their electors, the greatest number of
deputies, a majority of the deputies is returned by a minority of the
electors.

We suppose it will be conceded, that it is not very difficult to convert
such a representative system as this into a jobbing oligarchy.

Homer required ten voices and ten tongues to enumerate the vessels of
the Grecian fleet.1 We should stand in need of a far greater
multiplication of our vocal organs, if we had to enumerate the places
which have been filled up, or are to be filled up, by the French
ministry. The disposable revenue of France, not mortgaged to the
national creditor, is probably the largest in Europe, compared with the
average of individual incomes, and maintains, be it said without offence
to other governments, the largest and most thriving bureaucratie which
the world has ever yet seen. Conceive all this turned out of office at
one stroke! and the places to be scrambled for: you will have some
notion of what the antichamber of a French minister resembles, at eight
in the morning, for his levee, a levee in the original sense of the
word, is held at that primitive hour. Place, in France, is at Edition:
current; Page: [159] all times in great request, because it is the only
kind of unearned distinction which is procurable. In England a man
becomes important by wealth, or birth, or fashion, or twenty other
adventitious advantages, none of which confer one-tenth of the influence
in France, that they do here. But place is a possession of that solid
substantial kind, which will ensure consideration to the person who has
it, in all states whatever of society; and the fewer his rivals, the
greater is his consequence. In England the influence of a placeman is
comparatively little, because no mere placeman is so great a man as the
Duke of Devonshire, or Mr. Baring, or even Brummell, while his reign
lasted;2 but in France the placeman has no rivals in importance, except
those who are so by personal qualities, by integrity, intellect, and
acquirements. For consideration of this latter kind, there is no where
any great multitude of competitors. The other, a shorter and more
commodious road to the same end, is far more trodden by the herd. The
French accordingly, although, God knows, not a more worldly-minded
people than ourselves, but the reverse, are eminently a place-hunting
people. Their own admirable Paul-Louis Courier has made this national
characteristic the object of some of his most poignant sarcasms.3 “Tant
qu’il y aura deux hommes vivans,” says the clever and spirituel Fiévée,
“il y en aura un qui sollicitera l’autre pour avoir une place.”4

On the late occasion, moreover, tax-eating was a pleasure which came
recommended to the French electors by all the freshness of novelty.
Under the late Government the places were given either to the Faubourg
St. Germain, or to those who were affiliated to the Congregation.5 Now
there are some things which men will not do, even to get what they most
desire; and one of these things in France is, to go to mass. When these
were the terms on which place was offered, he must have been a bold man
who would have accepted them; though it must be admitted that M. Dupin,
who is not a very bold man, paid the price without even Edition:
current; Page: [160] being so fortunate as to receive any thing in
return.6 Others, however, though they might be more courageous men in
other respects, were not quite so courageous as M. Dupin in defying
contempt, and were fain, whatever might be their secret longings, to
remain out of place, until the people of Paris were so good as to take
up arms in order to turn out another set of placemen and bring these in.

Imagine, now, if you can, the feelings of an elector, who, never having
taken a bribe in his life, or known, otherwise than by rumour and
conjecture, the pleasure of living upon the earnings of others, beholds
for the first time the treasury doors thrown wide open to receive him,
and the public purse exhibited to his enraptured gaze, with the strings
hanging temptingly loose, and full liberty to thrust in both his hands.
Is it likely that this man will send deputies to the Chamber, to vote
for retrenchment? In the enthusiasm which succeeds a revolution, perhaps
he might. But give him time to acquire the feelings of a placeholder,
and make the experiment then. It is not always safe to judge what will
be a man’s conduct in his own case, by the virtue he shews in the case
of other people. Things may be exceedingly improper when done by a bad
government, which are very fit to be done by a good one; and what
government can be so good, as that which puts ourselves into place?

The virtue of the electors will be put to a hard trial even at the next
general election. Having five-and-twenty millions sterling a year, or
thereabouts, to dispose of in the lump, the ministers had for once their
hands loaded with more gifts than they knew what to do with. After
providing handsomely for their brothers and cousins, and the frequenters
of their drawing-rooms, and making, it is but fair to add, a
considerable number of excellent appointments, they were still able to
place a large surplus at the disposal of the deputies. The deputies also
had brothers and cousins, and many of them had drawing-rooms, though
none, it is probable, had so numerous a côterie as Monsieur and Madame
Guizot.7 But after the wants of all expectants down to the fortieth
cousin had been amply supplied, a considerable amount of patronage
remained on hand, which, unless report has greatly belied the deputies,
they have unsparingly employed in making friends in their departments,
with a view to their own re-election.

The necessity therefore is evident, of increasing the number of
electors, by lowering the electoral qualification. In what degree, is
the only question upon which there can be a doubt: and as the solution
of this question depends in some degree upon facts which we cannot
authenticate, we shall content ourselves with relating what, so far as
we could collect, appeared to be the prevalent opinion.

The same kind of persons who, when they hear the sovereignty of the
people Edition: current; Page: [161] spoken of, make themselves uneasy
on the subject of republicanism, are also apt, when there is any mention
made of extending the elective franchise, to be disturbed in their minds
by the idea of universal suffrage. We shall not here enter into the
question, whether it be desirable or not that the suffrage should be
universal, which is not quite so simple a question as they imagine;
although we should not risk much in undertaking to defend universal
suffrage against any arguments likely to be brought against it by
persons whom it frightens into fits. With respect to France, however,
they may calm their apprehensions. Most thinking persons in France
believe indeed that one day the suffrage will be universal; for in
France most thinking persons, strange as it may appear, have faith in
human improvement. But they reflect that at present no more than a third
of the French people can read and write, and they are of opinion that
vigorous exertions, continued during a long period, for the improvement
and diffusion of education, must precede the extension to the mass of
the people of the right of choosing their representatives. If the
suffrage were to be universal, they would prefer admitting two stages of
election; since it requires less knowledge and discernment to fix on the
person who is fittest to elect, than on the one who is fittest to be
elected. They affirm, however, that though the people of Paris and a few
other large towns may be qualified for such an extension of their
political rights, the working classes throughout France are by no means
sufficiently advanced even for this step, and they urge the government
to take measures for educating the people, with the express view of
fitting them for receiving and properly exercising so important a
privilege.

With respect to the degree of extension to be given to the suffrage
immediately,8 public opinion does not seem to be completely made up.
Much will probably depend on the result of the 130 elections on the
point of taking place, to supply the vacancies created by resignations,
annullation of elections, refusals to take the constitutional oath, and
acceptance of paid offices under the Crown. If the present electors, now
called upon for the first time since the revolution to exercise their
privilege, exercise it in favour of popular candidates, the public will
probably be tolerably well satisfied with the electoral qualification as
it is, and will not insist upon any great amount of alteration. If, on
the contrary, the electors, either influenced by the alarm which has
been industriously spread with respect to the progress of the
revolutionary spirit, or by an incipient feeling of a separate interest
from the people, should return members who will reinforce the centre, or
ministerial party, the doom of the present election law is sealed, and
public opinion will require a much greater reduction of the
qualification, and multiplication of the number of electors, than would
content a large majority at the present moment.

From such information as we possess, we are inclined to expect that the
Edition: current; Page: [162] popular party will be greatly strengthened
by the approaching elections. If so, the hopes of that party will be so
great from a dissolution of the Chamber, that we expect to see their
efforts directed mainly to that end, and the majority permitted to limit
the enlargement of the suffrage almost as much as they please, if on
that condition they will compromise the dispute, and consent to a new
general election.

It is certain that but a short time ago, a large proportion of the
popular party thought that the present electoral qualification, with the
suppression of the conditions of eligibility and of the double vote,
would form a very tolerable government. We think that they were in the
wrong; and we have reason to believe that most of them have since
changed their opinion. What misled them was the spirited resistance of
the present electors to the Polignac ministry. But this at least shows,
how little there is of either faction or fanaticism in their wishes for
change. We are firmly persuaded, that the great error which the bulk of
the popular party are likely to commit, and the error which they are
almost sure to commit, unless their minds become heated by the conflict,
is that of resting satisfied with too little concession, with too little
security to the people against the abuse of the powers of the
government.

The prevailing opinion at present seems to be in favour of extending the
suffrage to all who pay 200 francs a year of direct taxes. The
qualification is at present 300 francs.9 M. Mauguin advocated this
proposal on the ground that the same incomes which paid 300 francs in
1814, pay only 200 at present, owing not only to the diminution of
taxation on the whole, but the substitution, to a considerable extent,
of indirect for direct taxes, a policy always favoured by the late
government for the purpose of narrowing the electoral class.10 It does
not, however, appear to be known with any approach to accuracy, what
number of additional electors would be created by this reduction of the
qualification. Of course this point can be ascertained, and means will
be taken to ascertain it before any measure is introduced into the
Chamber. It is known that the number of cotes, or separate accounts with
the tax-gatherer, from one hundred francs per annum up to 300, amounts
to about six or seven times the number of the present electors. As the
same individual, however, often pays taxes in several departments, the
multiplication of the electors themselves would be in a smaller
proportion.

Many persons object, with considerable appearance of reason, to adopting
taxation in any shape as the basis of representation. They object to
making the Edition: current; Page: [163] constitution of a country
dependent upon its financial system, and consequently upon the
fluctuating policy or interested views of an existing government. They
see no reason that every time the budget is diminished, the rights of
the people should be curtailed. They would adopt some other and more
direct means of establishing a property qualification.

But whatever may be the pecuniary conditions which should confer the
elective franchise, there is one change which all parties are agreed in
demanding, and which we do not believe would be withheld even by the
present Chamber. This is the extension of the right of suffrage to the
members of the intellectual professions, free from all pecuniary
conditions whatever.11 A qualification by profession, concurrent with a
qualification by property, is not new in French law. It already exists
in another important case, that of a juryman.12 A list is annually made
out in each department, of the inhabitants of the department qualified
to serve on juries. The first part of this list comprises the electors
of the department; the second, all judges, advocates, attorneys,
surgeons, physicians, professors, and various other classes whose means
of livelihood are deemed a sufficient guarantee of their education. The
reformers wish that the second part of the list should be included in
the first, and perhaps several other professions added to it. You
require, say they, in your electors, a certain measure of property,
because it is a presumption of a certain measure of education. We cannot
suppose you so absurd, as to admit a mere presumption and reject the
certainty. You know, that all who practise certain professions must by
law have gone through a certain course of education. If the standard of
mental cultivation which is sufficient for a judge, an advocate, a
physician, or a public teacher, is not sufficient to render a man fit
for electing a member of parliament, whom, in the name of common sense,
do you expect to find fit for it?

These arguments are so obviously unanswerable, that we do not believe it
will even be attempted to attenuate their force. We are convinced that
whatever in other respects may be the character of the new election law,
one of its provisions will be the admission of all who are qualified to
serve on juries, to the elective franchise.

S—.


52.: ATTEMPT TO SAVE THE EX-MINISTERS
 EXAMINER, 24 OCT., 1830, PP. 673-4

This article comments on the attempts of the Chamber of Deputies to
avoid the consequences of having, on 13 Aug., 1830, unanimously approved
a resolution (Moniteur, 1830, p. 902) accusing of treason the
ex-ministers responsible for Charles X’s Edition: current; Page: [164]
July ordinances: Polignac, Peyronnet, Guernon-Ranville, and Jean Claude
Balthazar Victor de Chantelauze (1787-1859), who had become Minister of
Justice in May 1830. On 17 Aug. it had accepted for consideration a
motion to abolish the death penalty introduced by comte Alexandre César
Victor Charles Destutt de Tracy (1781-1864), defender of liberal causes
(ibid., pp. 918-19). On 8 Oct., 1830, it adopted, by a vote of 246 to
21, the Projet d’adresse au roi, proposing a major reduction in the
number of capital offences (ibid., pp. 1274-6 and 1278-82), which was
enthusiastically received by Louis Philippe on 9 Oct. (ibid., p. 1277).
This article, the first in the “Political Examiner,” is headed as title.
It is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A leading article in the
Examiner of 24th October 1830, headed ‘Attempt to save the ex-ministers’
” (MacMinn, p. 12). See also Nos. 68 and 71.

the french chamber of deputies has voted an address to the King,
requesting him to propose a law, for the abolition of capital punishment
in all cases of political crime, and in all other cases, except those of
a few specified offences, the most dangerous to the safety of society
and implying the greatest measure of depravity in the criminal.

Before we give utterance to the doubts and apprehensions which this
precipitate, and, we fear, ill-timed resolution, has excited in us, we
must request indulgence while we dwell for a few moments on thoughts of
a more exhilarating tendency. We cannot restrain our delight and
admiration on seeing this noble people afford every day some new and
splendid example of its progress in humane feelings and enlightened
views. When we recal the pitiable exhibition of our ministry and
parliament, on a fragment of this very subject, a few months ago,1 and
contrast it with what we now behold in France, with the leading
statesmen of all parties uniting almost as one man to effect this grand
legislative improvement, and its principle approved even by the
journalists who lament, and the placarders who inveigh against, its
retrospective application—it becomes painfully evident how greatly the
educated classes in France, on all questions of social improvement to
which their attention has been directed, are in advance of the majority
of the same classes in England, and how eminently their practising
lawyers, whose opinion must have peculiar weight on such a subject, are
distinguished in expansion of ideas and elevation of soul from our
narrow-minded technicalists.

The comments, which we cannot help making upon the occasion chosen for
beginning the mitigation of the French penal law, are made with the most
heartfelt wish that the event may prove them misplaced and inapplicable.
No Edition: current; Page: [165] reverence can exceed that which we feel
for the constancy of purpose, the unwearied and single-minded
philanthropy of such men as Victor de Tracy and Lafayette. They may be
better judges of the maturity of the public mind than ourselves, or than
the ablest and most enlightened of their own journalists. May they prove
so. No one, at least, can mistake the impulses by which their course has
been determined. As they were in the beginning, so are they now, and
will be to the close of their pure and noble career.2 But it is
something new to find the majority of the Chamber marching under their
banner. Who compose this majority? The very men who two years ago
scouted the same proposition when brought forward by the same
individuals. A taste for precipitate reforms is not the failing, of
which the rest of the conduct held by these persons since the revolution
permits us to accuse them. And wherein consisted the peculiar urgency of
the present case? In the circumstance that four men are about to be put
upon trial for their lives, by whose guilt more citizens have lost
theirs, than usually perish by all other crimes taken together in the
course of a century. It is true that these men were ministers. We may be
permitted to ask, would as much have been done for four criminals of any
other kind? But the fate of a minister concerns all who hope to be
ministers. It is well that the zeal which might else, peradventure, have
slumbered for some time longer, has been warmed into activity on one
subject at least, by motives of a potency so irresistible. Let us hope
that this enthusiasm, this generous reliance on the civilization and
intelligence of France, will not exhaust itself in one single
manifestation. Something of the same spirit will not displease us, when
the conditions of eligibility, and the qualification for the elective
franchise come to be decided on. Alas! that so great a measure should be
presented to a people, so ill prepared, we fear, to receive it, under
the auspices of men every one of whose acts is viewed with just
suspicion, and on an occasion so well suited to give colour to the worst
interpretation.

What becomes of the miserable criminals themselves, whether they die on
the scaffold, in gaol, or in dishonoured exile and obscurity, appears to
us a matter of consummate indifference. We do not desire their death;
though we cannot affect to feel for them any compassion. Our sympathy is
with the maimed, the widows and orphans whom they have made. But with
the past, punishment has nothing to do. Punishment cannot make that
which was, to have never been. The death of the assassin will not bring
back to life the victim whom he has slain. Punishment regards the future
alone. Safety, not vengeance, is its object, and all thinking men have
long been persuaded, that death is far from being the punishment which
operates with greatest force upon the minds of delinquents, far even
from being the most severe.

The only fit end of punishment is the prevention of crime: but is this
truth Edition: current; Page: [166] commonly felt and understood? Are
there many, besides persons of cultivated intellects, who have wrought
it thoroughly into their convictions, or impressed it deeply upon their
feelings? In most minds the idea of punishment has not ceased to be at
bottom that of expiation, or the principle of so much pain for so much
guilt; the argument most frequently insisted upon even for the
alleviation of a penalty, is this, that it is disproportioned to the
crime. Why is it that murder is almost invariably excepted from the
propositions even of philanthropists, for the abolition of capital
punishment? Murder is not the crime which it is most difficult to
prevent. The feeling which gave birth to the lex talionis3 has not yet
died away. The doctrine of blood for blood has sunk deep into the hearts
of the vast majority of every people who have been accustomed to see it
put in practice. We should not wonder, if there were some persons here
who are so foolish as to suppose, that it is thirst for vengeance which
makes the Parisian populace cry out, “Death to the ministers.”4 The
supposition is too absurd to be worth reasoning upon. If the people
desired vengeance, what opportunities of gratification did they not
forego during the three days? The very men who had been firing upon them
the moment before, were treated as soon as they were disarmed, with the
kindness of brothers. Except those of their own number whom they
executed for pillaging, it is not known that they put to death a single
person, after he had ceased to resist. The officers who gave the orders
to fire, remain unmolested to this day. Marmont himself was allowed to
retire in quietness, not a voice being raised for his punishment, not a
sign given that the idea of his liability to it had entered into any
mind.5 If they cry “death to the ministers,” it is because they do not
think it vengeance, but justice. Their sons, their brothers, their
comrades, have been slain—the ministers, in their eyes, are the
murderers. For death, death in their opinion is the proper return. They
cannot seize nice distinctions between political murder and common
murder. Numbers have suffered death for state crimes while Peyronnet was
minister, and they well knew on what multitudes more it would have been
inflicted if their enemies had prevailed. It appears to them right, to
try the prisoner by his own law. Their feeling, howsoever we may
consider it, is a moral one. It is their conscience Edition: current;
Page: [167] which speaks. It is a sentiment of justice, unenlightened,
indeed, and misplaced, but in short it is justice, such as they conceive
it.

You owe every thing to their sense of justice. It is by their love of
justice that your lives and properties are yours at this instant. Never
since the beginning of the world was there seen in a people such a
heroic, such an unconquerable attachment to justice. The poorest of the
populace, with arms in their hands, were absolute masters of Paris and
all that it contains; not a man went richer to his home that night. What
an instrument, what a safeguard for all that is virtuous have you in
such a people! but it is in their moral convictions that you must find
your strength. Once forfeit the right of appealing to their justice, and
what is there between you and the most enormous evils? Refuse a man
favour, and he respects you the more; refuse him what he deems justice,
and you excite his indignation. If what the people demand is in itself
unjust, withhold it. Real justice is not to be sacrificed to opinion.
But it is never unjust to execute upon a real criminal, what was the
acknowledged law when he committed the offence. It is only postponing a
reform, until it can be effected safely: and this reform, was it for the
sake of the criminal that you desired it? No, certainly; but for the
sake of the public. And when did a premature and brusque attempt to make
men better, ever fail of making them worse? It is dangerous in a
revolution to trifle with the moral feelings of a people. If you will
not give to the people what they think justice, tremble lest they should
take it.

We do not express this apprehension lightly. We hope better things from
the Parisian people. Indeed, the moment of greatest danger is perhaps
past; though there are appearances which, we confess, alarm us. But if,
when Polignac was arrested, and brought from Granville to Paris, it had
been known that when convicted he would not be put to death, who can
answer that an indignant people might not have rendered a trial
unnecessary? Spare the lives of political offenders when you can—spare
them always, if that be practicable, and we will gladly give you our
applause. But before you enact a law interdicting yourselves from
inflicting capital punishment, make yourselves sure that no cases will
arise, where what you have said you will not do, will be done for you by
the avenging hand of the people themselves, preferring, in the fury
excited by some outrage against their liberties or lives, what they deem
the substance of justice, to the forms.

Do we, then, attempt to set up the rude, undisciplined feelings of
untaught minds, as a rule of conduct for men of more enlightened
consciences and more exercised understandings? Is the penal legislation
of a country to remain for ever a literal copy of the barbarous
conceptions of its least civilized inhabitants? Far from it. We only
ask, that a purpose, of which we acknowledge the dignity and excellence,
should be pursued by the employment of such means as a rational person
would adopt in any other case of equal delicacy and difficulty. We
cannot conceive any graver or more solemn occasion, than that of a
deliberation which Edition: current; Page: [168] is to change the moral
sentiments of a whole people. What zeal and perseverance will not be
required, to place the objects and principles of punishment in their
true light before the people, and to make them familiar with the right
grounds of preference, presented in every possible aspect! What an
insight into the human heart, to probe to the bottom the seat of the
erroneous moral feeling which lies so deeply fixed in it; and what skill
in guiding and working upon men for their good, to find the means of
loosing the wrong association of ideas, which has wound itself round and
round the mind till it has eaten into the substance itself. Nor can the
abolition of capital punishment be considered as an insulated question;
it involves the revision of your whole penal code. No nation in Europe
is provided with unobjectionable secondary punishments. Your most
accomplished jurists have enough to do, in fixing, if not their own
ideas on the matter, at least those of the public, and you are to
recollect, that this last is a condition which, for persons desiring to
be the rulers of a free people, is not to be dispensed with. A despot,
indeed, has no need of so much trouble. He gives his fiat, and the law
is altered; the people, being accustomed to be so treated, acquiesce in
the alteration, however disagreeable to them, and in time the new law
gives birth to a new state of feeling. But the legislators of France
know full well, that the French people are neither children nor slaves,
and that they must henceforth be governed with the assent of their
reason and of their conscience, or not at all. And was men’s reason or
their conscience ever yet taken by storm?

By postponing the question of capital punishment, you would have
prevented, perhaps, an insurrection; a few months or years later you
would have carried your point, and retained, and even strengthened, the
hold which it is of so much importance that you should not renounce,
upon the moral sentiments of the people. All this you would have gained;
but you would not have saved the lives of the ex-ministers. Were their
lives, then, of sufficient value, to be saved from the course of law at
such a price?


53.: THE QUARTERLY REVIEW VERSUS FRANCE
 EXAMINER, 24 OCT., 1830, PP. 674-5

The stimulus for this leading article came from an unheaded article on
the fall of the Bourbons in the Morning Chronicle, 14 Oct., 1830, p. 3,
which criticized “Political History of France since the Restoration,”
Quarterly Review, XLIII (Oct. 1830), 564-96, by Charles Ross
(1799-1860), Conservative M.P. for St. Germains, 1826-32. Both the
Morning Chronicle and Mill get the title of the article wrong, and
mistakenly assume that it was by Basil Hall (1788-1844), a retired naval
officer with both scientific and political interests, known for his
travel books as well as his articles in the Quarterly Review. Among the
latter was “Political Condition and Prospects of France” (XLIII [May
1830], 215-42), which probably caused the mistaken attribution and
increased the abuse by the Morning Chronicle and Mill. Mill’s unsigned
article, headed as title, immediately follows Edition: current; Page:
[169] No. 52 in the “Political Examiner.” The description in Mill’s
bibliography is of “A leading article in the Examiner of 24 Oct. 1830,
headed ‘The Quarterly Review and France’ ” (MacMinn, p. 12), which is
identified by MacMinn as this article; however, the title in the
Examiner of No. 54 is “France and the Quarterly Review,” which might
imply that the bibliography refers to No. 54 only. For the evidence
supporting our conclusion that Mill wrote both, see the Textual
Introduction, cvi. The epigraph, which may have been supplied by the
editor, Fonblanque, has not been identified.

“We’re all a nodding.”

—Kings.

the chronicle has some masterly comments on an article in the Quarterly
Review, entitled “The Political History of France, since the
Revolution.” This is a subject with regard to which the Quarterly is in
a false position. Captain Basil Hall served in the quality of evil
spirit to Charles X; he marshalled him the way that he should go; he
placed the bloody dagger before his eyes,1 and pointed the road to
crime. Charles was hurled from his throne, the sceptre with which he had
bruised his people was wrenched from his grasp, but Captain Basil Hall
still sits at his desk; the pen with which he outrages reason and
disgusts humanity remains in his hand, and he yet asserts his disgraced
opinions in the Quarterly.

If we rejoiced in the fall of inimical organs, we should certainly
observe with complacency the operations of the Charles X of the High
Tory Journal; his magnificence is dealing in ordinances so fatal in
recoil.

The writer [says the Chronicle] honestly avows that it would have
afforded him great satisfaction had Charles X succeeded in establishing
a despotism. “We certainly wished (he says) that in the struggle, which
we had long foreseen, the immediate result might be the establishment of
something like despotic power in the Throne of France; and we did so
because we considered a despotism, in the present condition of the
world, as likely to turn out a lesser evil in that mighty country than
the other alternative. The past had satisfied us that if Charles X
desired the influence of a dictator, he was incapable of using that
influence for any unpatriotic purpose; that no fretfulness of idle
vanity, no fervor of selfish ambition, had tormented his ‘chair days;’
and that whatever extraordinary power he might obtain, would be held
conscientiously, as his only for an extraordinary and temporary
purpose—that of endeavouring to lay the foundations of a national
aristocracy.”2

Thus the good intentions of Charles were manifested in his breach of
faith and violation of the laws. Innocent love! Amiable forsworn!
Benevolent man of violence who attempted to upset the rights of his
people all for their good, and was himself upset instead! Good-lack! We
trust no kindred soul will steal his Edition: current; Page: [170] purse
at Lulworth, with the intention of making an excellent use of the
money.3 When power is reserved from magistrates, it is meant to place it
beyond subserviency to their intentions, good or bad; but what exquisite
simplicity in not recognising this design, and seizing unlawfully by
virtue of good purposes! The Standard remarks upon the above text:

We must remark that this King, in reliance upon whose good dispositions
the writer wishes for the establishment of a despotic power, is
seventy-five years old—has passed the allotted period of man’s life by
five years; but, non obstante the probability of his death or dotage,
the reviewer would establish a permanent despotism, in reliance upon his
good disposition.4

The Chronicle observes,

The principle which runs through this “Political History of France since
the Revolution” is, that the only legitimate object of a Government is
to create and preserve a powerful Aristocracy, and the various
Ministries since the Restoration are praised or blamed in proportion as
they pursued that object. A Church richly endowed, as subsidiary to the
maintenance of a rich Aristocracy, is, of course, also an object of the
writer’s admiration. The more important point—the happiness and
prosperity of 30 millions of Frenchmen, and how far such happiness and
prosperity are reconcileable with a rich and powerful Aristocracy and a
richly-endowed Church—is not deemed deserving of his notice. He admits
that the country never was more prosperous than during the period when
things were advancing to a crisis which justified the establishment of a
despotism:—“Beset as the exiled House was (he says), from the hour of
its restoration, with jealousies bitterly conflicting, and perpetually
threatening an explosion, it will not be denied that France enjoyed
under their rule 15 years of greater prosperity than had ever before
fallen to her lot. Such is the fact, ‘even their enemies themselves
being judges;’5 never since the foundation of the Monarchy were personal
liberty and property so safe. . . . Excluding certain political evils
from our view, that fine country presented, on the whole, a picture of
prosperity, which fixed the admiration of Europe.” But if France, since
the foundation of the Monarchy, never exhibited such a picture of
prosperity, does not this almost amount to a demonstration, that France
was not indebted for that prosperity to the Bourbons, but to the
circumstances wherein, during those 15 years, she differed from what she
was during the rest of the Monarchy? During the rest of the Monarchy she
had a richly-endowed Church and a rich Aristocracy; and during the 15
years she had a comparatively poor Aristocracy and a poor Church; and
are we not, therefore, justified in inferring, it was precisely because
she had a poor Aristocracy and a poor Church she was so prosperous as to
attract the admiration of Europe, notwithstanding she had also foolish
Monarchs, who created constant jealousies and heartburnings by their
incessant endeavours to bring about the state of things from which the
Revolution had liberated her? The Bourbons could not prevent the
prosperity which the Institutions, growing out of the Revolution,
produced in spite of their endeavours. The country prospered because
they were impotent.

“They saw (says the Quarterly Reviewer) that the faction (by faction is
meant all but the Aristocracy) which had never ceased to labour for the
ruin of the Monarchy, were Edition: current; Page: [171] rapidly
attaining the utmost height of rebellious audacity—and that the only
question was, who should strike the first blow. They saw, that to go on
with the Charter of Louis XVIII as it stood, was inevitably to shipwreck
the vessel of the State, and they thought to give it a chance by cutting
away the masts. The evolution was not successful, and the Monarchy went
down.” It is questionable how far it may be prudent to accustom people
to such phrases as Monarchy going down; for after the first shock which
such portentous words are calculated to produce is over, men naturally
ask themselves what the words really mean, and they find that the going
down of a Monarchy is not such a bad thing. They see, notwithstanding
the going down of the Monarchy, thirty millions of people exciting the
admiration and respect of Europe by their gallant bearing and their
magnanimity—they see them busied in improving their laws and
institutions, encouraging education, removing the obstacles in the way
of industry—and they see a weak and priest-ridden old man, who could not
enjoy in quiet the wealth which this people heaped upon him and his
family, but would persist in thwarting those to whose industry he was so
deeply indebted, notwithstanding his crime, peaceably conducted out of
the country he had outraged, and richly pensioned off. Truly there are
worse things in the world, at this rate, than the going down of a
Monarchy.6

They see, too, that the going down of the monarchy has been the rising
up of a magistracy; that the going down of one king has led to the
setting up of a better.

France is prosperous and moral, without a rich church or an aristocracy
of boroughmongering capacity; this is the sum of the quarrel with her
condition. She wants the main-spring of misrule, but she is deficient in
no feature of happiness, wisdom, or virtue, nor is it pretended that she
is deficient. She has every production but Lords and Squires, and the
magistracy of the brambles. From an article on the decline of science in
England, in the same number of the Quarterly which contains the
pestilent trash quoted, the Chronicle extracts this admirable passage:

“Of all the kingdoms of Europe (says the Reviewer) France is undoubtedly
the one in which the scientific establishments have been regulated by
the most enlightened and liberal principles, and in which science is
most successfully cultivated.” For scientific and literary
establishments, 103,791l. is annually voted by the Government. “Nor
(says the Reviewer) in her generous care for the respectability and
comfort of her scientific men, has France overlooked the most powerful
stimulus of genius and industry. All the honours of the State have been
thrown open to her philosophers and literary characters. The sage and
the hero deliberate in the same Cabinet; they are associated among the
Privy Councillors of the King; they sit together in her House of Peers,
and in her Chamber of Deputies; they bear the same titles; they are
decorated with the same orders; and the arm and the mind of the nation
are thus indissolubly united for its glory, or for its defence.” Let us
turn to Aristocratical, Oligarchical England. “While (says the Reviewer)
the mere possession of animal courage (which, of course, a well-fed
Aristocracy, in a temperate country like this, can hardly fail to
possess), one of the most common qualities of the species, has been
loaded with every variety of honour, the possessor of the highest
endowments of the mind—he to whom the Almighty has chosen to make known
the laws and mysteries of his works—he who has devoted his life, and
sacrificed his health and the interests of his family, in the most
profound and ennobling pursuits,—is allowed to live in Edition: current;
Page: [172] poverty and obscurity, and to sink into the grave without
one mark of the affection and gratitude of his country. And why does
England thus persecute the votaries of her science? Why does she depress
them to the level of her hewers of wood and her drawers of water?7 It is
because science flatters no courtier, mingles in no political strife,
and brings up no reserve to the Minister, to swell his triumph or break
his fall. She is persecuted because she is virtuous; dishonoured because
she is weak.” “England’s liberality to Newton (he elsewhere observes) is
the only striking instance which we have been able to record, because it
is the only one in which the honour of a title was combined with an
adequate pecuniary reward.”8

We prepare to treat Captain Basil Hall more at length in our next
number.


54.: FRANCE AND THE QUARTERLY REVIEW
 EXAMINER, 31 OCT., 1830, PP. 689-91

This item is a first leader in the “Political Examiner,” headed as
title. For the context and bibliographical entry, see No. 53. For the
attribution of this and No. 53 to Mill, see the Textual Introduction,
cvi. In Mill’s Somerville College set, the word “insult” has been
blotted out from the phrase “to insult the illustrious patriot” at
178.20.

in our last paper we made an extract from the comments of the Morning
Chronicle, upon the article on the late French Revolution in the
Quarterly Review. The reviewer makes a sufficiently pitiful figure in
the Chronicle’s hands; and there, perhaps, we might have left him, had
he not called down upon his own head a still more signal exposure and
castigation, by presuming to insult and calumniate the people of
England. The reviewer says, that the people of England have not
sympathized in the triumph of the French nation over the attempt to
abrogate its constitution, and to govern it by open force. He says, that
they have regarded the recent changes in France with “stern suspicion,”
and by so doing, have entitled themselves to as much laudation as he can
bestow upon them.1 Now this assertion, going forth among many other
marks of the worst feelings towards the French people, and amidst an
immense heap of blunders and misrepresentations respecting French
affairs, in a publication known to have a considerable circulation in
England, may be productive of very lamentable effects. It is not
impossible that the reviewer’s confident affirmation that the mass of
the English nation are of his opinion, may become known to the leading
statesmen and to the journalists of France, and may induce them to
believe that Edition: current; Page: [173] such is really the fact. If
this should take place, the prodigious increase of strength which the
expressions of honorable sympathy from the English in the late
achievement have given to the disposition to think well of this country,
and to keep well with it, might not be permanent, and might be succeeded
by a reaction which would be violent in proportion as the previous burst
of affection and gratitude (we speak from observation) was cordial,
generous, and sincere.

It therefore becomes highly necessary to apprise the French, that the
Quarterly Review represents the feelings of nobody except the church and
the aristocracy: that with the exception of these peculiar and narrow
classes, and their hangers-on and retainers, the readers even of the
Quarterly Review do not read it for the sake of its political opinions:
that when the reviewer affirms, that the Revolution has met with no
sympathy from the English people, all he really means is this, that it
has met with no sympathy from the church and the aristocracy: that the
great bulk even of the readers of the review, utterly repudiate and
disavow the sentiments of this article, and that it is generally felt
that the editor,2 by inserting it, has committed, with respect to the
pecuniary interests of the concern under his management, one of the
greatest blunders which he ever made.

It is not our intention, however, to dismiss this creditable effusion
with barely the degree of notice rigorously necessary for the purpose
for which we adverted to it. We think it may be instructive to exhibit
rather minutely what manner of man this is who thus takes upon himself
the character of spokesman for the English people. It is true that we
have not been gratified by the discovery of one single endowment in the
writer qualifying him to have an opinion. But the more scanty his stock
of ideas, the apter an illustration is he of the tendency of such as he
happens to be master of. These amount to two; Church, and Aristocracy.
He can think nothing but church and aristocracy, he can feel nothing but
church and aristocracy. These two ideas compose the entire furniture of
his skull.

With an intellectual matériel of this extent, he turns his attention to
France; where he speedily discovers that neither of the idols of his
homage exists. This nakedness of the land fills him with dismay. Seeing
neither “a powerful church establishment,” nor a “wealthy hereditary
aristocracy,” he sees nothing but a “monarch” and a “mob.”3 Yes, he
scruples not to aver, that whatever is not either church or aristocracy,
is “mob.” He accordingly proclaims his wish that Charles X had succeeded
in overpowering the French nation. He regrets that the result of the
struggle was not “the re-establishment of something like despotic power
in the throne of France:”4 feeling certain that it would have been used
“conscientiously” for one only purpose, that of endeavouring to create a
rich landed aristocracy. This, and a powerful church establishment, are
the two Edition: current; Page: [174] “great absent elements,” without
which no country is capable of freedom.5 This maxim in politics is
assumed throughout, as one which neither needs, nor is susceptible of,
proof; and it is easy to perceive, such is the texture of the writer’s
mind, that the doctrine really appears to him to be one of those to
which the human understanding necessarily and spontaneously assents.

We are thus given to understand that in the opinion of the church and
the aristocracy, a church and an aristocracy, each of them the richest
and most powerful of its kind, are necessary conditions of what they are
pleased to term freedom: and that despotism, naked unmasked despotism,
is not only preferable to the want of both or either of these
requisites, but is positively the best form of government which can
exist in a country not provided with these costly, but indispensable
appendages.

It is not, perhaps, very surprising, that the church and the aristocracy
should imagine all this. But it does, we confess, somewhat surprise us
that in the times we live in, they should expect to find any persons who
will receive it on their authority. They may have heard of an opinion
which has gone forth rather extensively, that instead of being the
causes of freedom, a powerful church and aristocracy are the main
obstacles to it, in the present state of society. They may have heard it
whispered that from the days of Themistocles to those of Thomas
Jefferson,6 every nation which has been conspicuous for good government,
or eminence in intellect, arts, or arms, (not excepting England itself)
has been one in which either a powerful church and aristocracy did not
exist, or in which their power was irresistibly controlled by opposing
circumstances. They may have been told, that the nations to which at the
present moment, the twofold blessing which they brag of, belongs in the
most peculiar degree, are those which have passed into a proverb
throughout all Europe as the favourite abodes of barbarism and
superstition.7 They may have perceived that in England so far are the
merits of the church and the aristocracy as guarantees of freedom from
being appreciated, that what the people are seeking is freedom from
these very bodies, from their engrossing and irresponsible domination.
We can assure them, that they will find few persons besides themselves,
who are not very willing just now to listen without either impatience or
aversion, to what can be said in behalf of these and similar opinions.
Now, if the case be as we state it, we may just submit, whether it might
not have been as advisable for such writers as the Edition: current;
Page: [175] Quarterly reviewer to make themselves a very little less
sure, that their panegyrics upon despotism, in comparison with any other
government except that of a church and an aristocracy, would produce
exactly the kind of effect which they wish for, upon the public mind.

Thus much with respect to the principles of this performance: what else
it consists of is history. We invite attention to its history. The
history of the late events comprises, as our readers know, some rather
remarkable circumstances. They will, no doubt, feel curious to learn in
what manner the reviewer can contrive to turn these to his purposes.

It might have been expected, that a mind of any generosity, though it
might be so unfortunate as to see nothing but gloom and desolation in a
prospect so full of brightness and joy, would somewhere have exhibited a
gleam of human sympathy for a noble people, whose bravery and
self-control throw every example of previous heroism into the shade, and
exalt, as has been many times exclaimed in our hearing, the dignity of
our common nature. The whole population of a vast city, without leaders
and without concert, rushing to arms simultaneously with a divinus
furor,8 at the first announcement that brute force had usurped the place
of law—storming building after building against regular
troops—advancing, numbers of them, to certain death, without either
ostentation or regret—putting bread into the mouths of their conquered
enemies the moment they had thrown down their arms—watching over the
safety of every monument of art or taste, with the solicitude of
virtuosi—executing summary justice upon every one who sullied their
cause by appropriating either private or public property—and returning
empty-handed and in rags to their humble homes, without once suspecting
that they have done any thing extraordinary—this was a spectacle which
might have warmed the heart even of a high-churchman. Even the authors
of Blackwood’s Magazine, who, however destitute of principle, are not
without occasional touches of generous feeling, could not help paying,
at least in their number immediately following the events, a just
tribute of admiration to the heroic populace of Paris.9 Some traces of
corresponding sensibility in the Quarterly reviewer, might have induced
a candid opponent to have looked with less severity upon errors which
could then have been attributed to no worse cause than a circumscribed
and perverted understanding. But no; the same contraction of soul, which
can see no freedom but under the protecting hug of a wealthy church and
a powerful aristocracy, can feel for no virtue beyond the same narrow
pale. It belongs not to a mind constituted like the reviewer’s, to
Edition: current; Page: [176] believe in the possibility of such virtue.
He would not credit his senses, if they testified in its favour. He is
in the condition sometimes treated of by the Catholic divines, and
termed invincible hardness of heart; a state, in which the sinner is not
precluded from a chance of ultimate salvation, being scarcely
responsible for disobedience to a summons which his nature does not
qualify him to hear.10

“Of the transactions of last July,” says the reviewer, “we will say
nothing, as they are too recent and too much enveloped in mystery, which
time alone can unravel, to form the subject of steady contemplation.”11
We are not at all surprised, that he should be anxious to pass over
unnoticed the events of July. He is, however, much mistaken, if he
imagines that his readers will pass them over. He will find them capable
not only of admiring the conduct of the Parisians, but also of
reflecting upon it. He and his fraternity have used the former
revolution as an argument against the people long enough, the present
one will be used by the people as an argument against them: and the
greater has been the success of the well-paid industry which they have
employed in heightening and colouring for effect, the excesses of the
first revolution, the more eagerly will men enquire and speculate upon
the cause which has rendered the present revolution such as it is
impossible to calumniate. They will have no help from the reviewer in
this investigation. No cause, capable of accounting for such a
phenomenon, is to be found in his philosophy.12 Yet it has a cause,
though it be one which it was not very likely that such a person as he,
should discover:—The people had in the interval shaken off their church
and their aristocracy. Such was the blessed effect of this riddance,
that all the horrors we are constantly told of, have not been a
counterpoise. Those horrors, followed by 25 years of merciless war,
which would have been sufficient to brutalize the people of any other
country, have been to this people but as a fiery furnace,13 out of which
it has issued in a brighter and purer state of being. And has the
catastrophe which was to blot out France from the map of Europe, and
extinguish the sun of morality from the universe, come to this? Even so:
and to this must the worst revolution come, so it only deliver the
nation from the curse of a wealthy church establishment and a powerful
aristocracy. A revolution may be bungled, it may be misdirected, the
wisest and best of the citizens may perish in its storms, all that is
generous, all that is aspiring, all that is enlightened, may seem to be
destroyed; yet shall not the hopes even of its most sanguine supporters
be ultimately frustrated, if it have Edition: current; Page: [177]
achieved this deliverance. The first revolution has rendered the French
common people the finest in Europe, and the second revolution has found
them so.

We pass to another particular of the reviewer’s display.

The events of July are too recent and too mysterious “to form the
subject of steady contemplation,” or, peradventure, they are too recent
and too indisputable to admit of misrepresentation. But he, to whom the
events of July appear “enveloped in mystery,” is perfectly versed in the
most secret acts and inmost designs of every conspicuous person in
France for the last fifteen years. Nothing is mysterious to him, except
what is plain and intelligible to every one else. The incredulity which
cannot swallow, perhaps the best attested facts in history, stands
open-mouthed to take in every old woman’s tale of treason and
conspiracy, which has been got up since 1815 to serve the momentary
purpose of a minister, or perhaps only to gratify the readers of the
Quotidienne by the excitement of a little gentle apprehension. If the
reviewer believes half what he says, he believes, we will take upon
ourselves to assert, at least twice as much as his informants. If the
ex-ministers had but known, when they penned their Rapport au Roi, half
as much as the reviewer knows, of their own case!14 But there are
certain things, which would scarcely occur to any one, who is at a less
distance than two hundred miles from what he is talking about.

The liberals, as they used to be called, in the Chamber of Deputies,
formed, according to the reviewer, an organized body, unintermittedly
occupied in conspiring to dethrone the Bourbons. If the assertion should
meet the eye of any one who knows them, we envy his amusement. We think
we can figure to ourselves the consternation of the 221, if it had
entered into their wildest dreams that any act of theirs could bring on
a revolution in France. They have scarcely ceased trembling at it, three
months after the event. Their object, it seems, “has been, and is,” at
once to “delude the nation by the cant of equality,” (a word from which
they shrink as a pious man avoids the utterance of a blasphemy,) and to
“defy it by such an organization of National Guards as invests them
virtually with the whole power of the sword.”15 At the same moment
appears the projet de loi for the “organization” of the National Guard,
of which the first article declares, that it consists of all males from
20 to 60 not forming part of the regular army. Need we say a word
more?16

When men like this reviewer take upon themselves to give their opinion
upon a subject, with the facts of which they are wholly unacquainted,
and are thrown Edition: current; Page: [178] upon such presumptions and
conjectures as are suggested à priori by the old saws which compose the
sum total of their little philosophy, this is the pitiable predicament
in which they place themselves.

When we find such a man as this, a man possessing not one of the
elements which go towards making up a rational conviction, a man in
whose head there is nothing but a besotted terror of the people, and a
childish admiration of the privileged classes,—when we find this man
setting himself up as a judge not only of actions but of motives, and
distributing infamy, as if the execrations of mankind belonged to him to
dispose of; we feel ourselves absolved on our side, as he has thought
proper to absolve himself, from the conventions which prescribe that
whatever may be our secret opinion, our language at least shall express
no feeling incompatible with respect for our opponent. This man, who
would not venture to call his soul his own, if the church or the
aristocracy needed it, dares to stile Lafayette a “wretched traitor.”17
If the man to whom we are replying is sufficiently insensible of the
place which he himself holds in the creation, to be unaware of the
immeasurable distance which exists in point of virtue between such men
as him and such a man as Lafayette, let the contempt of Europe apprise
him of it. The gulph is far too wide, for eyes like his to reach across;
nor will the dirt flung by hands like his, fall near enough to be even
perceptible to the illustrious patriot against whom it is aimed.

It may perhaps be supposed from all this, that the reviewer vows eternal
enmity to popular governments, and to the government of France in
particular. No such thing. He tells us on the contrary in plain terms,
that if they succeed in establishing themselves, he will be in their
favour. This we readily believe. We do not question in the least, that
he will always be found on the side of power, let it be where it may.
The following are his words:

If they go on well—if they do establish a government at once free and
firm—if they can in practice enjoy a free press, without its running
into licentiousness—and all this, without erecting among themselves a
wealthy hereditary aristocracy and a powerful church establishment,—we
shall freely admit ourselves to have been grievously mistaken; that we
have been accustomed to do the French people gross injustice;—nay, that
our whole system of political faith has been wrong, and that the age of
miracles is come again.18

“A government at once free and firm,” is, it appears, the condition, on
which the Quarterly reviewer will give, to the new order of things in
France, his valuable adhesion. In the mean time, does he tell us of any
thing, which is to prevent the government from being at once free and
firm? Nothing whatever; except that it has no wealthy church, or
powerful aristocracy; and that neither of the two is very likely to be
created, under the government which has now been Edition: current; Page:
[179] established. We concede to him both these points, and consent, as
he desires, to await the result of the experiment, well assured of the
ultimate suffrages of such men as he, who are always found on the
successful side.

But what demon, in what evil hour, suggested to him to name a licentious
press, as the peculiar evil from which the possession of a church and an
aristocracy can alone render a nation exempt? Audacity of assertion does
much, but did he imagine that it could do every thing, when he described
the French newspapers as “the most basely libellous press that ever
disgraced a civilized age and country”?19 When a man does not shrink
from asserting, because it suits his purpose, that of which the direct
contrary is known to be the fact by every one who can even pretend that
he has the means of knowledge, there is scarcely any word but one, and
that an extremely short one, which expresses without ambiguity the real
character of the affirmation. The French periodical press is probably
the most decorous in Europe; the most licentious is unquestionably our
own. Foreigners are struck with amazement at the malignity and
profligacy of the English periodical press. And of what part of it in
particular? Of that part which is peculiarly addressed to, and depends
entirely upon the support of, the church and the aristocracy. We have
observed and we well remember, that every periodical publication in our
time, which has systematically attempted to recommend itself to
low-minded readers by scandal and detraction, has shewn by its
high-church politics among what class it thought it likely that the
greatest number of such readers would be found. Attacks on private
character or individual peculiarities, are utterly unexampled in a
French newspaper; and it never entered into a Frenchman’s imagination to
conceive the possibility of such publications as the fashionable prints
of our time. But the meaning of a “basely libellous press” we suppose to
be, one which is not favourable to “a wealthy hereditary aristocracy”
nor to “a powerful church establishment.”

It has been asserted that the press of the United States of America is
licentious. We know not to what degree such is the fact; and the
probability is, that the majority of those who parrot the assertion
known as little. But the testimony of Jefferson, the head of the
democratic party, than whom no one ever underwent in a greater degree
the unscrupulous virulence of newspaper opponents, inclines us to
believe that the accusation against the press of America is true to a
certain extent.20 Allowing this, it surely is probable that the cause is
co-extensive with the effect, and is one of the circumstances common to
England with the United States, not one of those which are common to the
United States and to France. Edition: current; Page: [180] Nor need we
search long to discover a perfectly adequate cause. In America as in
England, periodical authorship is in the hands of writers who make
literature their trade, and pursue it as they would gin-making, in the
same sordid spirit, and with the same object, the greatest possible sale
of their commodity. In France, on the contrary, it is in the hands of
men who labour principally for the respect of their fellow-citizens; who
know that their chance of obtaining this, does not depend upon their
success in scraping together a greater or a less quantity of money: who
belong to the most high-minded and the most highly-cultivated portion of
la jeune France,21 and who, if they have any interested motive in their
labours, have that of shewing themselves to be fit for those high
functions in the State, which are as accessible to them, if properly
qualified, as to any other candidate, and which their youth has commonly
been spent, as far as in a private station it could, in rendering
themselves competent to fill.

But of this on another occasion, and in another manner. It goes too deep
into the structure of society, and is connected with too many of the
most elevated considerations, to allow of its being mixed up with the
exposure which we have thought it useful to perform, of one of the most
impotent attempts ever made to palliate a fallen tyranny. That exposure
we now consider sufficient. And as the reviewer concludes by
congratulating his countrymen that the testimonials of sympathy with
France “have been countenanced by hardly one name which any human being
will dare to call respectable,”22 we will give utterance, in return, to
our feelings of joy and exultation, that even in a periodical press
which so ill represents the better part of the national mind, the
writers who have thought they could find their account in exciting odium
against the new government of France, form a feeble and insignificant
minority. And it is due even to that minority to declare, that so far as
we have observed, not one of them has exhibited so grotesque a contrast
between the presumption of the design and the miserable poverty of the
execution, as the writer of whom we now finally take our leave.


55.: FRENCH NEWS [1]
 EXAMINER, 7 NOV., 1830, P. 715

This article was prompted by the appointment on 2 Nov. of a new ministry
under Jacques Laffitte (1767-1844), the former ministry having fallen as
a result of its efforts to save the ex-ministers (see No. 52). It is the
first of 107 articles on French politics Mill supplied to the Examiner
from this date until 31 Aug., 1834, usually on a weekly basis. We have
given serial numbers to these; Mill wrote other articles on France (as
well as other subjects) for the Examiner during this period, to which
different titles are appropriate. This article is headed “London, Nov.
6” but, like the others in the series, is untitled and Edition: current;
Page: [181] unsigned and does not appear in a named section of the
Examiner. In his bibliography Mill usually groups several of these
articles in one entry as here: “The summary of French affairs in the
Examiner from 7th November 1830 to 17th April 1831 inclusive: comprising
several long articles” (MacMinn, p. 12). These are Nos. 58-9, 62, 64,
66, 68, 71-2, 74, 76, 79, 81, 83, 85, 87, 89, 91, 93, 95-6, and 100.
This article continues with paragraphs on German, Dutch, and Belgian
affairs that are here omitted because there is no evidence connecting
them with Mill other than their presence in the foreign news section.
The Examiner of 14 Nov., p. 729, indicates an erratum: “supposed” should
replace “suffered”

(here corrected at 181.27).

the expected change in the French ministry has at length taken place.
The fraction of the old administration, which was opposed to popular
measures, has given way; and after an ineffectual attempt by M. Casimir
Périer,1 to form a ministry of compromise, the vacancies in the Cabinet
have been filled by new appointments, said to be made under the auspices
of M. Laffitte and M. Dupont de l’Eure.2

In this list, which we have given with our foreign intelligence,3 it
will be perceived that M. Odilon-Barrot is not included.4 It is reported
that he was passed over at his own request. Whatever be the cause, we
regret it; as he enjoys a far larger share of the public confidence than
the young peer who has been preferred to him,5 and it is of great
importance that those who are raised to power by the popular voice,
should be men of sufficient weight of character, to retain popularity
without the necessity of constantly courting it and sacrificing to it.
We fear that this cannot be affirmed of M. de Montalivet. His devotion,
however, to the cause of the revolution was proved by his acting a
distinguished part in the glorious three days; and it may be hoped, that
the high character of M. Laffitte, and especially of M. Dupont de
l’Eure, will give weight to any administration in which they are
supposed to be the ruling spirits.

M. Mérilhou is an advocate of great reputation and well-known popular
principles.6

Edition: current; Page: [182]
M. Maison is the officer who commanded the French expedition to the
Morea. His appointment is said by some to be merely a temporary
arrangement.7


56.: IGNORANCE OF FRENCH AFFAIRS BY THE ENGLISH PRESS
 EXAMINER, 14 NOV., 1830, PP. 723-4

This article is in response to what Mill considered the ignorant and
misleading reporting of French affairs and of English attitudes,
particularly by The Times. A leading article in the “Political
Examiner,” headed as title, it is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A
leading article in the Examiner of 14th Nov. 1830 headed Ignorance of
French affairs by the English press” (MacMinn, p. 13). Two errata are
listed in the Examiner of 21 Nov., p. 740: “mere” should read “more” and
“set of people to find acts that” should read “sort of people to find
out what”

(these corrections are made at 183.22 and 183.24-5).

the crazy outcries of our newspapers against the changes in the French
ministry, are not calculated to do much honour to England in foreign
countries. They will not, however, make so unfavourable an impression
upon the French, with regard to our national mind, as might be imagined,
since that people, with their usual misapprehension of every thing
English, will probably conclude that our daily press is in the pay of
the Duke of Wellington. They are by no means aware of the true state of
the case, namely, that there is a fund of stupidity and vulgar prejudice
in our principal journalists, which needs no extraneous inducements to
call it forth; and that our journals, speaking of them generally, are
faithful representatives of the ignorance of the country, but do not
represent, in any degree, its knowledge or its good sense. One would
imagine that, among journalists, a moderately accurate acquaintance with
France for the last fifteen years, ought not to be a very rare
endowment: if a writer in the newspapers does not know the history of
his own times, what, in the name of heaven, does he know? Yet, during
the recent struggle in France between the men who made the revolution
and the men who were seeking to profit by it, the small number among our
journalists who dreaded giving a false and mischievous opinion, dared
not to give one at all; while the larger number, who were utterly
reckless of the consequences of what they wrote, have made a display of
ignorance such as all who knew them would naturally expect. At the head
of these was the blundering newspaper which recently asserted that
Charles de Lameth, a man who was with Edition: current; Page: [183]
difficulty saved from the September massacres, was a conventionalist:1
we need scarcely say that we allude to the Times, a paper which seldom
lets a week pass without affording satisfactory evidence that for it to
have any opinion at all on French affairs, is a piece of presumption
which nothing can excuse. This paper announces, that the popular party
in France, among various other bad qualities, breathes nothing but war
against other states, and hatred of England;2 which assertion it makes
with as little diffidence or hesitation as if it really knew any thing
about the matter, and enforces the accusation with as much truth and
discernment as were displayed in its eulogies on Polignac, in August,
1829,3 and with a refinement and delicacy of expression which reminds us
of its abuse of the same person in August, 1830, when “vagabonds” was
the most correct and appropriate term which it could invent to
characterize his delinquency and that of his master.4

At a time when hundreds of the most influential of our countrymen knew,
by personal observation, that there is a kind of furor among the French
youth for rejecting territorial aggrandizement, and respecting the
rights of other nations, and that it is almost enough to be an
Englishman in order to be received every where by them with open arms,
we shall not dwell upon the peculiar propriety and good sense of the
above denunciations. We have no doubt that, so soon as public opinion
shall have declared itself in opposition to them, the Times will,
according to its customary practice, back out of them. In the mean time,
it is consoling to recollect, that what is now affirmed of the more
popular section of the libéraux, is no more than what was laid to the
charge of the whole body until a very recent period. It is incredible
how long it takes a certain sort of people to find out what they cannot
see with their eyes. The Times, in its knowledge of history, is just
twenty years behind the facts. It is living, not in 1830, but in 1810.

Periodical writers, however, entitled to far greater respect, have
adopted, though in an inferior degree, the same tone of alarm;
particularly a writer in the Scotsman, and one in the Foreign Quarterly
Review.5 We do not so much blame these writers, as lament these habits
of mind in the English public, of which the Edition: current; Page:
[184] raw speculations of those two publications on the state of France,
are a remarkable exemplification. There is no creature in Europe so
timid, politically speaking, as your Englishman of the higher or middle
ranks, because he is more sensitive than any other specimen of humanity
yet known, on the score of insecurity to property. But it appears to us,
that his fears are hardly ever in the right place. Formerly, an
Englishman used to pride himself on being a friend of liberty, but now
his first impulse always is, to take part with power. It never needs any
evidence to satisfy him that men are disaffected without cause. If there
arise a dispute between a people and an established government, and he
(as is usually the case) does not happen to know what it is about, it
would be amusing, if an exhibition of imbecility in the most momentous
of earthly concerns could excite any but feelings of the deepest
seriousness, to see how instantly and undoubtingly it is taken for
granted that the people are in the wrong. Of this, the tone of public
feeling respecting Belgium is a pregnant example. Most fortunate it is
that Charles X was so imprudent as openly to abrogate the constitution
of his kingdom, instead of continuing to evade it, and fritter away its
provisions in detail. We have been convinced, from the outset, that if
that monarch had not taken as much pains as he did to reduce the
question to its simplest terms, despotism or not, in such sort that it
did not require any knowledge of France to see that he meditated a
different kind of bad government from that which we have been accustomed
to;—the English, good easy people, would have continued to believe, that
none but enemies of England, and zealots for war and conquest, none,
moreover but a faction, contemptible in numbers and abilities, doubted
the excellence of the Bourbon government, or were dissatisfied with the
share of constitutional freedom which that family was willing that
France should enjoy.

The purposes of the popular party have been very fully stated at
different times in our own pages. The character of those who have held
power for the last three months, but who have now been happily ejected
from it, we shall take an early opportunity of delineating. Want of
space compels us to defer this work for the present.


57.: PROSPECTS OF FRANCE, VI
 EXAMINER, 14 NOV., 1830, PP. 724-5

For the context and the entry in Mill’s bibliography, see No. 44.

we have treated of the demands of the popular party with respect to the
conditions of eligibility, and of the elective franchise. We shall next
advert to the subject of internal administration.

It is allowed by all philosophers, and felt by all freemen, that
securities for the Edition: current; Page: [185] goodness of the
Government are not enough; it is also requisite to have as little of it
as possible: the Government ought to do nothing for the people, which
the people can, with any sort of convenience, do for themselves, either
singly or in smaller associations.

The very reverse of this maxim has directed the legislation and
administration of France, from the reign of Napoleon to the present
time. The principle of the imperial regime, faithfully adhered to by
restored legitimacy, was, that the people never should be permitted to
do any thing for themselves, which the Government could in any manner
contrive to do, or pretend to do, for them.

If a nation could be judged of, from the laws which are made for them by
those who hold the right to govern them, not from them, one must needs
suppose that the French, being themselves the most stupid of all
possible people, were luckily provided with the cleverest of all
possible governments. So far as the theory of the French law can be
gathered from its practice, the supposition upon which it is founded
appears to be, that there is nothing for which the French people are
fit, nor any thing for which their Government is not. The French cannot
be trusted to construct a road, or a canal; but the French Government,
in addition to its other labours, finds time for making and mending all
the roads and canals in France, which consequently are on that scale of
shabby magnificence, customary in the doings of governments, being twice
as broad, and more than twice as bad, as the canals and roads of any
other civilized country. Again, no Frenchman is supposed capable of
selecting a school fit to be entrusted with the care of his sons or of
his daughters; accordingly the Government ordains that no places of
education shall exist, except those subordinate to the department of the
French administration called the University, or which are licensed and
inspected by its officers; whereby it came to pass, that in a country,
in many parts of which even the street-sweepers would think themselves
degraded by keeping company with a Jesuit, the Jesuits for several years
held in their hands the majority of the establishments for education.1
Furthermore, the French Government, in order not to be divested of its
proper influence in all affairs of importance which are transacted
between the Straits of Dover and the Pyrenees, reserves to a sound
discretion residing in its own breast, the exercise of a veto on all
evening parties, given, or attempted to be given, within the kingdom of
France; no one being permitted to receive more than twenty persons at
one time into his house without leave of the police.2 It was under no
other than this very law, that the society called Les amis du peuple was
recently dispersed.3

Edition: current; Page: [186]
But the subject we would chiefly advert to, is one which, next to the
constitution of the sovereign body, is the most comprehensive and most
important topic of internal policy in all countries whatever, and
especially in France; municipal institutions, or the composition of the
subordinate legislatures and executives, to whom the authority in
matters of purely local regulation is confided.

We are almost certain that there is not any country in Europe except
France, in which there exists no vestige of any local authority not
emanating from the Crown. We must have recourse to the despotisms of
Asia to find a parallel. The municipality, corporation, or commune, was
the very first free institution which the countries of modern Europe
knew. By its means, the citizens emancipated themselves from the
condition of serfs of an aristocracy, who seemed sent from Heaven to
perpetuate the savage state. To it they owed that security, and that
personal independence, which enabled them to accumulate wealth, to train
up a high-spirited and numerous armed population, and with that wealth
to buy, and with those armed men to demand, a voice in their own
government. The associations of chapmen and artificers to manage their
local concerns by their own officers, first taught governments to think
of the people as a power in the state. To obtain money from these
associations did the kings of Europe call together delegates from them,
under the name of representatives of the Commons, and conceded to them,
one by one, all the privileges, in virtue of which any nation in Europe
claims to call itself a free people. In this mode did England, Scotland,
Spain, the Netherlands, Sweden, Norway, Denmark, and, we believe, even
Poland, acquire such representative constitution as they do now, or did
at any former period, enjoy. In France, the crown grew in power faster
than the communes, and a despotic instead of a representative government
ensued. But if the citizens acquired no share in the management of the
state, they retained that of their own local affairs. Town-governments
not emanating from the Crown, and, in many provinces, representative
assemblies of a more or less popular character, termed States
Provincial, with powers very extensive and diversified, subsisted down
to the Revolution; when they were abolished by the Constituent Assembly,
but replaced by municipal institutions of a still more popular kind.4
These were swept away by the hand of military usurpation, and a system
introduced, founded on the principle of holding all the reins of
government in a single hand;5 a system upheld solely, and for a short
time, by the Edition: current; Page: [187] préstige of military success,
and the impotent attempt to perpetuate which, after the gilding had been
rubbed off the chains in which it bound the people, has cost the
Bourbons their throne.

In England, the business of local administration is so parcelled out
into shares, and cut up into unconnected fragments, that it is hardly
either spoken of or thought of, collectively and as a whole. Every
parish has its separate government, every corporate town has another,
every country has a third; to determine which of the three is the most
corrupt, must be left to those who are curious in nice distinctions:
local trusts, and commissioners of every variety of denomination,
perform a large portion of the public business; for another large and
highly important part no provision whatever is made, and when done at
all, it is done by the awkward hands of the legislature itself, in the
form of an act of Parliament pro hâc vice;6 and finally, a large portion
is done, or considered to be done, or considered proper to be done, by
the public itself. There is just one possible mode of transacting the
public business worse than this, and that is the mode prevailing in
France; where every human being, who is empowered to give the most
trifling order to the most inconsiderable body of his fellow-citizens,
from the préfet down to a sort of village watchman called a
garde-champêtre (the judges excepted), holds that power from the direct
appointment of an officer of the crown, holds it during the good
pleasure of that officer, and without a vestige of accountability to any
other being in human shape; for he cannot even be tried by a court of
justice for murder committed in the exercise of his authority, without
the previous consent of his official superior, or, in the last resort,
of a tribunal called the conseil d’état, which deliberates with closed
doors, and of which the members are removable at the King’s pleasure.

Hence it is, that in France you cannot cross the street without jostling
a placeman. Hence it is, that the bureaucratie is five times more
numerous than the army; for the latter does not exceed 240,000 men,
while the officers of government, removable at the pleasure of the
crown, amounted in 1818, according to M. Fiévée (and there are few more
trust-worthy authorities) to the incredible number of between twelve and
thirteen hundred thousand individuals, more than a sixth part of the
male adult population of France at that period.7

We quote from the Correspondance Politique et Administrative of M.
Fiévée a passage containing as curious a picture as was probably ever
seen, of the real liberties of a country which boasted of a charter, and
whose rulers thought the nation extremely unreasonable, because it would
not be persuaded that a Chamber of Deputies was liberty. The nation was
wiser, and used that one Edition: current; Page: [188] liberty, as our
ancestors used that of withholding the supplies, for the purpose of
obtaining by its means all the other liberties which they had not.
Speaking of the prerogatives of the crown, M. Fiévée enumerates that of
possessing—

Une justice particulière qu’on appelle justice administrative par la
nécessité de lui donner un nom, et en vertu de laquelle les douze ou
treize cent mille agens soldés de l’administration ne peuvent être
traduits devant les tribunaux ordinaires, sans l’autorisation de
l’administration; de sorte qu’un percepteur qui, dans l’exercice de ses
fonctions, tueroit un comptable, ne pourroit être mis en jugement sans
que la royauté y eût consenti. Par le même systême, le plus mince agent
de la navigation intérieure peut déranger les spéculations du commerce,
sans que le commerce puisse s’en plaindre devant une autre justice que
la justice administrative; enfin, nos lois ou décrets encore en vigueur
disent qu’un fournisseur qui, sur ses billets, a soin d’ajouter son
titre de fournisseur après sa signature, ne peut être poursuivi par ses
créanciers devant les tribunaux, sans le consentement préalable de la
justice administrative; laquelle justice se rend sans publicité par des
agens que l’autorité place et déplace à volonté. En un mot, attirer à
soi l’examen et le jugement de toute affaire et de toute cause dans
lesquelles se prétend intéressé un pouvoir qui se mêle de tout, tel est
le matériel de la royauté en France.8

Well might M. Fiévée add, “Certes, dans aucun temps et dans aucun pays
le pouvoir monarchique n’a eu des attributions aussi étendues.”9 We
suppose that there never was any other country on the face of the earth,
in which the executive, having made a survey and classification of all
matters requiring a judicial decision, set apart from the rest all in
which it could itself in any way directly or indirectly be considered a
party, and determined, that precisely in those would it also be the
judge.*

Let it be granted that the rights and constitution of the legislative
body will henceforth secure France (as it certainly ought) against the
possibility of a profligate ministry. The people of France conceive,
that the general affairs of the nation afford ample employment for any
seven persons, even admitting that cabinets henceforth are never to
consist of any other than the fittest men. They look back with no
pleasant reminiscences to the times when Hamburg could not cut down five
trees, the property of the town, without an order from Paris, which took
eight months to arrive, nor Holland repair the dykes which alone stood
between her and destruction, until permission had been applied for to
the Ministère de l’Intérieur, and, at the end of six months, obtained.†
The people of France are not disposed any longer to keep up, at their
expence, a bureaucratie twelve hundred thousand strong, spread over the
whole country, and who, if not called to account by seven men in seven
large buildings at Paris, are not Edition: current; Page: [189]
accountable at all. Accordingly, the French people, from the Restoration
to the present time, have never ceased to demand popular municipalities.

They are willing that the executive power, the right and duty of
enforcing obedience to the laws, the chief civil authority in the town
or district, should reside, as at present, in officers nominated by the
Crown, and removeable by the royal authority. But these functionaries
are assisted by deliberative bodies, called conseils-généraux de
département, or conseils généraux de commune. To these bodies, who are
at present named by the officer, to whom they act as assessors, belong
several functions of very great importance. Among these are the
repartition of the taxes, many of which are granted by the Chamber of
Deputies in the lump, such and such a gross sum from each department:
and, moreover, the supplies required for local purposes are voted by
these local bodies exclusively, the legislature interfering no further
in the matter than to fix a limit which the aggregate of these supplies
shall not exceed; namely, a certain per centage on the general taxes of
the department. Now, these councils, it is maintained, ought to be
elected by the people; and by a rather extensive suffrage too—a
suffrage, perhaps, co-extensive with direct taxation. To this the most
moderate of the popular party attach great importance. It would be
absurd, they say, to entertain any apprehension of evil from the
predominance of the democratic principle in matters of purely local
arrangement; while such a constitution of the local bodies would
withdraw an immense amount of patronage and corrupt influence from the
Ministry, would be a valuable counterpoise to a mere aristocratic
constitution of the legislature, would gradually train the people to the
management of their own affairs, and help to qualify them for admission,
at no distant period, to political privileges more extended than what
any party at present would willingly entrust to them.

Not so thinks the Chamber of 1830! A municipal law is in progress,
through that chamber, avowedly transcribed, with a few trifling
alterations, from the law proposed by Martignac in 1829, with the
amendments of the then chamber,—a law, under which the local bodies
would be elected by a more restricted suffrage than even the chamber
itself—a law, which is tolerable only when compared to a system, in
comparison with which any thing would be endurable.10 Because the French
would have accepted this law, bad as it is, rather than fight, the
chamber considers it good enough for them after they have fought and
conquered. But it will not do; this step has done greater damage to the
chamber in public opinion than any other of their proceedings; it was
altogether contrary to the expectations Edition: current; Page: [190]
even of those whose distrust of their intentions was the strongest. The
ministers themselves, though on every other point the sworn allies of
the chamber, have not ventured, on this occasion, openly to approve what
they have not felt inclined to dissent from. Not a word has escaped
their lips.

One topic more remains to be discussed—the constitution of the Upper
Chamber. This, however, must be deferred to the next paper,11 which will
conclude the present series.

S—.


58.: FRENCH NEWS [2]
 EXAMINER, 14 NOV., 1830, P. 729

This article is headed “London, Nov. 13.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55. One correction in the text is explained in n6.

the french chamber of deputies has postponed the choice of a President,
in the place of M. Laffitte, until its number shall be completed by the
arrival of the new members.1 The Government candidate is M. Girod de
l’Ain, who has just resigned the office of Prefect of Police.2 It is
believed that the doctrinaire party will set up M. Casimir Périer in
opposition to M. Girod; but that estimable deputy, who by no means
participates in the feelings and purposes of the doctrinaires, and who
but two months ago resigned the Presidency on account of ill health,
will not, it is believed, allow his name to be employed as an instrument
in the hands of a party which has no root in the opinion of the French
nation, to oppose the only ministry, in the formation of which, as it
now appears, the King and the people could agree.

It is said that the new ministry will introduce an Election Law
immediately after the Chamber shall have appointed its President. The
provisions of the intended law are expected to be the following: 1st.
The entire suppression of all conditions of eligibility—2d. The
reduction of the qualification for an elector, from 300 to 200 francs of
direct taxation—3d. The admission of the professions now entitled to
serve on juries, to the elective franchise, free from any pecuniary
condition—4th. If in any department this extension of the franchise
shall not Edition: current; Page: [191] produce one elector for every
100 inhabitants, that proportion will be made up from among the persons
most highly taxed below 200 francs.3

The elections have not been on the whole so popular as some, nor so
aristocratic as others, expected. Among the new members are to be found
the highly estimable names of Voyer d’Argenson, de Cormenin, Isambert,
Barthe,4 and Odilon Barrot.

The Chamber, since its meeting, has been occupied in disposing of former
orders of the day. M. Bavoux’s proposition for diminishing the taxes on
newspapers, has not been adopted as a whole,5 but the stamp duty has
been lowered from five to four centimes per sheet,6 and the amount of
the security required from newspaper proprietors has been somewhat
diminished.7


59.: FRENCH NEWS [3]
 EXAMINER, 21 NOV., 1830, P. 745

This article is headed “London, Nov. 20.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55.

the debate in the french chamber of deputies, on the motion for reducing
the stamp duties on newspapers, is disgraceful to the Chamber.1 M. de
Villèle’s famous chambre des trois cents2 would not have made a more
discreditable Edition: current; Page: [192] display on this proposition,
which was resisted chiefly on the avowed ground of the necessity of
curbing the licentiousness of the Press. So rapidly has the new
oligarchy succeeded to the worst feelings, and even to the silliest
catch-words of its predecessors.

The new ministers, we lament to say, did not support the motion,
alleging that they were not prepared to consent to any sacrifice of
revenue. This temporizing is very deplorable, as it would be the
grossest hypocrisy in the ministers to pretend to suppose that the
profuse expenditure of the Bourbon government does not admit of
retrenchments far exceeding the trifling revenue afforded by the taxes
on discussion.

Several of our newspapers, and their correspondents at Paris, continue
to heap abuse upon the popular party.3 There are no wise and moderate
men, according to them, but those who think that 88,000 men should have
the power of dividing among them, at discretion, a revenue amounting
(independently of the interest of the public debt), to thirty millions
sterling; all the rest are firebrands, who seek to throw the world into
disorder. The 88,000 electors are the nation. The nation is declared to
sympathize with the Chamber, because the 88,000 have generally
re-elected the old members: although even the 88,000, when they had no
old member to re-elect, have in many instances elected new ones of a
very different complexion.

The Times takes great pains to represent Mauguin, one of the feeblest
declaimers in the Chamber, as the leader of the popular party, and the
organ of its sentiments;4 the real fact being that he is a recent and
unexpected proselyte to that party. The Times adds, that although an
abler man than M. Odilon Barrot, he was never mentioned in the late
contest for the ministry. This, in the first place, is incorrect; and
secondly, M. Odilon Barrot, if he be not a far abler man than M.
Mauguin, ill-deserves the reputation he possesses. The true reason why
M. Mauguin was not put forward by the popular party generally, for a
place in the ministry, is simply that they did not consider him fit for
it.

The chief measures of the Belgian Provisional Government, as specified
in their address to the Congress, which we have given in another part of
the paper, will form an advantageous contrast to those of the French
Chamber.5

Edition: current; Page: [193]
All attempts in favour of the Constitutional cause in the north of Spain
appear to be, for the present, at an end.6


60.: USE AND ABUSE OF THE BALLOT
 EXAMINER, 28 NOV., 1830, PP. 754-5

This article is a reminder that while Mill was writing about the
progress of the July Revolution, England was experiencing her own crisis
over the Reform Bill; the secret ballot was an issue for radicals in
both countries. He later became an opponent of the ballot, but continued
to use the passage he here quotes from his father’s History of British
India (see CW, Vol. XIX, pp. 331-2). This is a leading article in the
“Political Examiner,” headed as title and described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A leading article in the Examiner of 28 Nov. 1830,
headed, Use and Abuse of the Ballot” (MacMinn, p. 13). Two corrections
are indicated by Mill in the Somerville College set, “partial to” is
corrected to “protected” (194.34) and “Legislature’s” to “Legislator’s”
(194.36); the first of these is also mentioned as an erratum in a note
to the Examiner, 5 Dec., p. 770.

the feelings and purposes of the present Chamber of Deputies in France
display themselves more and more plainly every day. We invite attention
to one of the most recent of its “faits et gestes.”

By the existing laws, no one can follow the business of a printer
without a licence from the Government,1 who hitherto have habitually
kept the number so far below the demand, that a licence bears a
considerable pecuniary price. A bill was brought in by M. Benjamin
Constant, for opening the trade to all who chose to engage in it. The
several clauses of this bill were successively voted in the Chamber, by
open suffrage: but when the question was finally put, “that the bill do
pass,” on which, by the regulations of the Assembly, the votes were
taken by ballot; the same Chamber, which had voted each of the separate
clauses, rejected, by a large majority, the entire bill.2

One good effect at least will result, it is to be hoped, from this
exhibition. We trust that we shall hear no further abuse of the French
people for the feelings which they justly entertain towards this
despicable body.

Edition: current; Page: [194]
When the people first began, after the revolution, to show symptoms of
dissatisfaction with the Chamber, most persons in England, taking it for
granted, as usual, that if there were any difference of opinion, the
people must be in the wrong, were astonished to find the French so
capricious, so distrustful, so unreasonably suspicious of their public
men. We too are astonished, but from rather a different cause. We marvel
at the easy good nature, the unsuspecting credulity with which the
severest critics of the Chamber, in August last, allowed themselves to
believe that its only fault would be a little slowness, timidity, and
irresolution in the accomplishment of reforms. We conversed with several
leading men of the popular party shortly after the revolution, and no
one of them entertained a suspicion that the motion which the Chamber
has now rejected would meet with the slightest resistance.

We must add a few words respecting the ballot. We do hope and trust that
the French will now see that the voting in a representative assembly is
not one of those cases in which secret suffrage is desirable.

Every person who reflects, for a single instant, on the effect of the
ballot, must see that it is simply this: to withdraw the voter from the
influence of hopes and fears held out by other persons, and leave him
free to act according to those interests and inclinations which are
independent of the will of other people. Is it not then obvious, without
the necessity of discussion, that the ballot may be good or bad,
according to circumstances? It is good where the voter’s own interest is
to vote right, but when he may be bribed or intimidated by persons whose
interest it is that he should vote wrong. It is bad where his own
interest is to vote wrong, and where the only means of giving him a
sufficient motive to vote right, is responsibility, either to the law or
to public opinion.

In the election of members of Parliament, under a really popular system
of election, the ballot is indispensable. For if the electoral body is
sufficiently large, it is the elector’s own interest to make a good
choice. Responsibility, in that case, is not requisite: the use of
responsibility is, to control those who have an interest in doing wrong.
If the vote is secret, therefore, it will be honest; but if it be known
to his landlord, or to any other person on whom he is dependent, and
whose interest it may be that he would make a dishonest choice,
dishonest it will probably be.

The very reverse of all this is true, when the votes to be protected are
those of members of Parliament themselves. There the danger is not from
the interest of those on whom the Legislator may be dependent, but from
the Legislator’s own interest. Though he be independent of every body
else, that is no security for public virtue, when he has the power of
making laws in his own favour, and voting the public money into his own
pocket. The only check upon a legislator is liability to be turned out
for misconduct; and his constituents cannot employ that check unless
they know what his conduct is.

The distinction is so obvious, that it might be expected to occur even
to the most obtuse: yet in France, as in ancient Rome, the ballot is
applied in cases in Edition: current; Page: [195] which it is clearly
mischievous; while in England it is not employed in a case in which its
employment is indispensable to good government: and we find the Standard
and the Times urging against secret voting at elections,3 the argument
which holds against secret voting in the House, namely, the inestimable
value of public opinion as a check, not adverting to the fact that
public opinion, though a necessary restraint upon the representatives
and trustees of the public, can be no check upon the public itself.

We subjoin a passage from Mr. Mill’s History of British India, in which
the theory of the ballot is clearly and forcibly expounded. We earnestly
request the Standard to consider this passage with attention, having it
deeply at heart that so able a writer should come to a due sense of the
value of the only one among the essentials of a real Parliamentary
reform, from which he is as yet a dissentient. As for the Times, we know
the condition, and the only condition, on which we can obtain its
concurrence. We shall have its support as soon as we can succeed in
persuading it that the majority of buyers are on our side.

There are occasions on which the use of the ballot is advantageous;
there are occasions on which it is hurtful. If we look steadily to the
end to which all institutions profess to be directed, we shall not find
it very difficult to draw the line of demarcation. A voter may be
considered as subject to the operation of two sets of interests: the
one, interests arising out of the good or evil for which he is dependant
upon the will of other men; the other, interests in respect to which he
cannot be considered as dependant upon any determinate man or men. There
are cases in which the interests for which he is not dependant upon
other men, might impel him in the right direction. If not acted upon by
other interests, he will in such cases vote in that direction. If
however he is acted upon by interests dependant upon other men, which
latter interests are more powerful than the former, and act in the
opposite direction, he will vote in the opposite direction. What is
necessary, therefore, is, to save him from the operation of those
interests. This is accomplished by enabling him to vote in secret; for
in that case the man, who could otherwise compel his vote, is ignorant
in what direction it has been given. In all cases therefore in which the
independent interests of the voter, those which in propriety of language
may be called his own interests, would dictate the good and useful vote;
but in which cases, at the same time, he is liable to be acted upon in
the way either of good or evil, by men whose interests would dictate a
base and mischievous vote, the ballot is a great and invaluable
security. In this set of cases is included the important instance of the
votes of the people for representatives in the legislative assembly of a
nation. It is therefore of the highest importance that they should be
protected from that influence. There is however another set of cases in
which those interests of the voter, which have their origin primarily in
himself, and not in other men, draw in the hurtful direction; and in
which he is not liable to be operated upon by any other interests of
other men, than those which he possesses in common with the rest of the
community. If allowed in this set of cases to vote in secret, he will be
sure to vote as the sinister interest impels. If forced to vote in
public, he will be subject to all the restraint, which the eye of the
community, fixed upon his virtue or knavery, is calculated to produce;
and in such cases the ballot is only an encouragement to evil.*

Edition: current; Page: [196]


61.: PROSPECTS OF FRANCE, VII
 EXAMINER, 28 NOV., 1830, PP. 756-7

This is the final article in the series beginning with No. 44, q.v.

of the great constitutional questions, about to become the subject of
discussion, and, it is in vain to disguise the fact, of acrimonious
dispute, between the men of the restoration and the men of the new
revolution, only one remains to be noticed—the inheritableness of the
peerage.

We anticipate some difficulty in making perceptible to the English
public, of how little comparative importance this matter is; in fact, we
foresee that it will be the source of more misapprehension, and more
groundless alarms, than questions of ten times as much consequence as
really belongs to it. Men in whose eyes a large extension of the right
of suffrage would be no more than what Mr. Canning would have called the
infusion of a popular spirit into the constitution,1 will consider the
attempt to dispense with a hereditary peerage as a dangerous innovation,
establishing the unqualified and formidable ascendancy of the democratic
principle. To such a degree are men governed by words rather than
things, by forms rather than substance. A house of peers is not
necessarily an aristocracy because it is so styled in the traditional
phraseology of the British constitution: and the question, whether the
French chamber of peers shall be hereditary, does not concern the
democratic principle, nor any principle at all except this, that if
there be any use in a house of peers, there is use in having one which
shall be an object of respect, and not of contempt.

It is well known that for a century or more, the sole idea which the
continental nations had of a constitutional government, consisted of the
British constitution misunderstood. They took our own word for the
theory of our constitution; and were entirely unaware, that the British
constitution has no theory. The works of design and intelligence have
their laws, but the fortuitous concourse of atoms has no law. Where
means have been used to attain an end, an account of the means may be
written down, and the record may serve other agents to produce a similar
effect: but the seeds of the British constitution fell, sprouted, and
grew up, as it pleased God; and the means having pre-existed, ends were
found for them by gentlemen in their closets, who seldom proceeded upon
any other principle than that of sharing, as fairly as they could, the
praises due to all possible forms of government, among the constituent
parts of that of England. The doctrine, that the British constitution
was a compound of the three simple forms of Edition: current; Page:
[197] government, monarchy being represented by the king, aristocracy by
the upper house of parliament, and democracy by the lower, a conceit
which never could have issued from any head but that of a pedant,2
passed off among ourselves in a manner characteristically national, that
is to say, it served as well as any other form of words to swear by, but
never assumed a sufficiently definite signification in our minds, to
determine the slightest of our actions. To foreign nations, however,
this went forth as the true theory and approved explanation of the
British government, and became the received formula for making a
constitution. Accordingly (not to lose time in irrelevant examples) the
framers of the charter of Louis XVIII having a constitution to make, and
desiring to make it properly, called together a number of gentlemen,
gazetted them as dukes, barons, and counts, settled pensions on them
from the public purse, and said, There is an aristocracy.3

This impromptu parody on our House of Lords possesses not one of the
attributes from which the political importance of its prototype
originates. The House of Lords is one of the oldest institutions of
England: it is identified with all our historical recollections, and
recognized by the traditional doctrines of our government as an
essential part of the most stable constitution which ever existed. Its
members are likewise the possessors of enormous wealth, in a country in
which wealth exercises over the minds of men a command which it
possesses among no other people. We are moreover continually told, and
most by the greatest admirers of the institution, that all these sources
of moral influence are not enough, and that the House of Lords would be
in practice reduced to a cypher, if it did not, besides all this, send,
by means of corrupt influence, nearly a majority of members to the lower
house. If there be a particle of truth in this asseveration, and even
though there be none, we have only to suppose that our peerage were but
of yesterday, with incomes averaging from five hundred to a thousand
a-year, and a reformed House of Commons, and from the political weight
which would attach to such a body, we may approximate to a just
conception of the present importance which belongs to the
mock-aristocratic branch of the French legislature.

If you nickname three hundred gentlemen in various ways,4 and then
declare that they are a branch of the sovereign legislature, equal and
co-ordinate with the assembly which represents the people, you must be
supposed to intend that they Edition: current; Page: [198] should have a
will of their own occasionally, and are not to vote always exactly as
the other assembly bids. Now, if they refuse to concur with the Commons
in any measure which the latter have much at heart, what is to prevent
the lower house from voting the upper one a nuisance, and declaring the
law to be a law notwithstanding their dissent? The question reduces
itself to this: would the people obey? Has the chamber of peers, or can
any hereditary chamber, in the situation of France, have a sufficient
hold upon the popular mind, for the people to regard a law as less a law
because it has not received the concurrence of that chamber? No one, who
has any knowledge of France, will answer in the affirmative.

Every thing is new in France, and neither the chamber of peers nor any
other institution has any of that stability which belongs to antiquity.
It has none of that weight which is derived from the possession of
wealth. There is only one remaining source of moral influence, and that
is, personal merit and reputation; and of this the chamber is fast
losing the little which it ever had. A hereditary body may be as select
as an elective one, when first created; and the French chamber did
contain some men of mathematical and chemical celebrity, and some of the
very few politicians of honourable notoriety whom the revolution and the
empire had left:5 but these are mostly dead, or so old as to be hors de
combat, and as mathematical and chemical knowledge are not hereditary
though the peerage is, their sons are neither wiser nor better than any
other men (English eldest sons excepted): the chamber, therefore, would,
by this time, have been rather deficient in notabilités, had it not been
a practice since the restoration to elevate to the peerage every
minister to whom it was desired to give an honourable dismissal, and had
not the statesmen who were in this predicament been luckily very
numerous.6 The debates, therefore, of the chamber of peers, now that
they are open to the public, and reported in the newspapers, display a
list of speakers, the perspective of which ten years ago, considering
that a revolution has intervened, would have not a little astonished the
parties concerned, nearly all of them being of one or more of the many
ministries of Louis XVIII. The president of the chamber is Pasquier, the
inévitable, as he is called, a man celebrated for falling always upon
his feet, whatever be the turn in Edition: current; Page: [199] affairs:
sometime prefect of police under Buonaparte, and orator to every
ministry from the restoration to the commencement of the Villèle
government.7 The principal speakers are Lainé, Decazes, Portalis,
Siméon, Roy, Dubouchage, and, we may add, the late Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Molé;8 men highly unpopular when they were formerly in office,
and not less so now, saving that the more recent oppressors eclipse the
hatred borne to men, some of whom had the redeeming merit (our
Shaftesbury had it too)9 of resisting the worst acts of ministers still
worse than themselves.

There are so few people who can see an effect after it has come to pass,
that we must not be extremely severe on those who merely cannot foresee
it while it is yet to come. Therefore we should not, perhaps, quarrel
with the Bourbons for having rien appris before the Restoration, if they
were found capable of learning any thing thereafter.10 Now this really
was the case: for, in a short time after the formation of the chamber of
peers, it occurred to its founders, that it somehow was not so
influential a body as the British House of Lords. It struck them that
the cause of this must be, that the House of Lords possessed large
property, and that the Chamber of Peers was possessed of none. If the
seat of the evil was that the peers were without property, this might be
cured by giving them property; but it is part of the lot of man that he
cannot give what he has not got. The Bourbons, nevertheless, determined
to do all they could; and it was enacted that majorats, or entails,
might be created in the families of peers, and that the peerage should
not in future descend to the son of the possessor, unless there had
first been created in favour of the son, a majorat of a prescribed
amount. But to require a Edition: current; Page: [200] man to transmit
to his descendants what he never had, did not seem a very efficacious
contrivance for enriching the family. The tarif, therefore, of the
peerage, was perforce adapted to the actual fortunes of the peers; and
as these did not on the average exceed what would be considered in
England a moderate provision for clerks in a public office, the
endowment of a baron was fixed at four hundred pounds a-year, and those
of the higher grades of nobility in a corresponding proportion.11 Being
now the assured possessors of incomes upon this scale, the peers, it
seems to have been supposed, had no longer to fear any want of
importance arising from want of wealth. Such was the clumsiness of the
original work, and such the clumsy attempt to mend it; but any other
remedial application would equally have failed to give life or reality
to an institution radically incompatible with the circumstances of
France, and of which nothing can ever exist in that country except the
forms and the name.

The great error was the original error, of imagining that law-makers are
like God, who can create matter as well as arrange it and mould it into
form. This extent of power is not conceded to man: he cannot create
something out of nothing. It is easy to make the charter of a country
assert that an aristocracy exists, but that will not make it exist, if
materials are not contained in the country for forming one: the maxim
holds equally good of governments and of coats, that they must be cut
according to your cloth. There do not exist in France any enormously
wealthy families. There exist a large number of persons of moderate
wealth. By clubbing these together, you might form a tolerably compact
basis for an oligarchical representation, but you are merely ridiculous
when you single out a few hundred at random, and affect to call them by
the name of peers. The moment when, by adopting the hereditary
principle, you give yourself only the ordinary chances of meeting with
personal merit, there is not the slightest reason why any three hundred
whom you encounter in the street should not have been taken instead of
those whom you now have.

It is considered desirable, in France, and in most other countries, that
there should exist a second legislative chamber, less democratically
constituted than the first, in order that it may be less liable to be
acted upon by temporary excitement; strong enough to withstand sudden
and hasty impulses of the lower house, but not to resist its deliberate
and mature conviction, supported by the public voice. Considered as a
general principle of politics, it does not belong to us either to
enforce or to combat this maxim: it is sufficient that such are the
grounds upon which the institution of a house of peers is commonly
defended. Now, in contriving means for this end, it must never be lost
sight of, that, in a government which is really, and not nominally
representative, the body which Edition: current; Page: [201] the upper
house is intended to check is one in which the public will, of
necessity, have almost unlimited confidence. It will generally comprise
the men of whose talents and of whose integrity the people at large
entertain the highest opinion; and the people, moreover, feel the full
assurance at each instant, that, if they should see reason to alter
their favourable opinion, they will have an opportunity of getting rid
of the individual before he has time to betray his trust. Unless,
therefore, the upper house shall also possess a moral ascendancy,
capable, upon occasion, of counteracting and counterbalancing that of
the lower, it will, if new, only be suffered to exist on condition of
being absolutely inoperative; although, if old, it might be borne with,
as so many other things are borne with, for the toleration of which
their age is the only reason.

In order to possess this ascendancy, it must conform to the conditions
to which the attainment of moral influence is subject in France. Now,
respect is not transmitted from father to son, in France, like an
heir-loom. Wealth, by the laws of all countries, is hereditary, and,
therefore, where the grand source of respect is wealth, respect also
descends in the hereditary line. Where the main source of respect is
ancestry, respect is, of course, hereditary. But, in France, wealth is
not what confers respect, because it never was what conferred political
power; and the respect for ancestry, along with its power in the state,
foundered in the storms of the revolution. No nation so utterly despises
hereditary distinctions. On the other hand, no people, perhaps, ever set
a greater value upon personal ones. Yet, instead of endeavouring to
accumulate in the upper chamber the greatest amount of personal
distinction possible, the Bourbons, in a spirit of blind imitation,
founded it upon a hereditary distinction; and, to complete its
insignificance, dubbed its members by the titles of the old noblesse,
titles so contemned, that perhaps a majority of those who have inherited
them, are ashamed to wear them.

If the idea of a peerage necessarily implies hereditary descent, call it
a senate: but of this be sure, that it will be efficacious for the
purposes for which it is defensible if for any, exactly in proportion as
it can be made to consist exclusively of men of established and high
reputation. A writer in the Edinburgh Review appears to us to
misunderstand the matter, when he is afraid that the senators will
generally be the tools of the court, in the hope of being rewarded with
the fee-simple of their peerage.12 It has never been observed that the
marshals of France, or our knights of the garter, however able to serve
the court, or however willing to do it for hire, have claimed as wages
that their bâton or their ribbon should descend to their heirs; and this
for an obvious reason, that it is easy to bribe them in ways which would
excite far less of popular odium. When the chances of birth no longer
introduce into the upper chamber, in spite of the Edition: current;
Page: [202] greatest purity in the new appointments, a majority of the
feeble or of the disreputable, it will evidently be far more difficult
than now, for the creator of peers to agglomerate other such particles
to the same body. But the objection is not only mistaken in principle,
it is also singularly inapplicable in point of fact, since it is
generally agreed, in France, that the royal prerogative of creating
peers,13 so grossly abused on more than one occasion by the Bourbons,
must be subjected to great restrictions, if not entirely done away. More
interesting questions having hitherto engrossed the public mind,
specific plans have not as yet been suggested for the composition of the
senate, but the qualification will probably be that of having served for
a given number of years in certain offices, or been re-elected deputy a
given number of times; or any other mark which may seem, on
consideration, more certainly indicative of the confirmed good opinion
of the people.

We have now accomplished our task. The design of these papers was to
prepare the English public, or such part of it as might be pleased to
listen to us, for the struggle which we knew was approaching between the
new oligarchy and the people; to arm them against the misapprehensions,
and strengthen them against the false alarms, which were sure to be
industriously propagated, and which, in themselves, were not unnatural;
to supply facts which we knew that the public were not likely to hear
from any other quarter, and without which we are aware that they could
not possibly understand the true character of the events which were
coming. While we have been thus engaged, the contest has already begun;
and all who read the daily newspapers must have seen enough to be
convinced that our undertaking was not a useless one. Of the value of
our opinions, others must judge, but to the correctness of our facts in
every material circumstance, we are certain that any candid person will
bear witness who takes the proper means of verifying them. And if, in
the mean time, we have only assisted in making it known that France is a
subject on which our newspapers, with their vapouring, are profoundly
ignorant, and thoroughly to be distrusted, we have not laboured in vain.

S—.

Edition: current; Page: [203]


62.: FRENCH NEWS [4]
 EXAMINER, 28 NOV., 1830, PP. 761-2

This article is headed “London, Nov. 27.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55.

the chamber of deputies having rejected the bill brought in by M.
Benjamin Constant to exempt persons desirous of following the business
of a printer from the necessity of obtaining a license from the
Government,1 M. Laffitte has declared that the ministers will take up
the subject.

M. Laffitte has also introduced a bill for equalizing the pressure of
certain taxes which at present press very unequally upon different parts
of France.2 The sentiments and views expressed in the speech with which
M. Laffitte prefaced his motion, are generally liberal and enlightened.

With these exceptions, the new Ministry has given no indication of its
being animated by a popular spirit; and, unless it is reserving itself
for the great struggle which is approaching, on the election law,3 it
will find in a few weeks, that it has thrown away the popularity which
is its only strength, to pay its court to an inept and ill-designing
majority, who will give it no thanks for what they will consider with
truth, as the effect of mere timidity and irresolution.

The retirement of Marshal Gérard from the war department, has modified,
and, we regret to say, materially for the worse, the composition of the
Ministry.4 Marshal Soult, the new minister of war, has been, from the
beginning of his career, the ready slave of any one who would employ
him. He is indeed understood to have been chosen in deference to the
general opinion of the army, that there was no other man equally fit for
that particular post; but there is not the same excuse for the promotion
of Sébastiani, a man almost equally destitute of political integrity, to
the Foreign Department:5 his place as Minister of Marine being supplied
by d’Argout, a man fitter for the Guizot or even the Martignac Cabinet,
than for a ministry of popular principles.6

Edition: current; Page: [204]
Meanwhile, the Chamber never lets an occasion slip for displaying its
anti-popular spirit; and we see no chance that even a moderate and
insufficient reform of the law of elections will be conceded to any
thing less than intimidation.

Prosecutions multiply against the popular press. M. Guizot, in a recent
speech, attempted to draw a distinction between the old-established
papers and the new ones, and complimented the former on their
comparative moderation;7 but M. Persil,8 procureur général in the Cour
Royale, an obscure provincial advocate who was selected as successor to
M. Bernard of Rennes,9 when the latter refused to become an instrument
in persecuting the press, has now instituted a prosecution against a
newspaper of the class which M. Guizot exculpated, the Journal du
Commerce.10

In our next paper we shall make some observations on the ill-advised
prosecution of M. de Kergorlay, for his protest against the change of
dynasty.11 For the present, we recommend to the reader’s attention, on
this subject, the observations of a writer whom we seldom have occasion
to commend, O.P.Q., of the Chronicle.12

The change of Ministry in England13 has given the greatest satisfaction
in France, being considered a pledge of the pacific character of our
foreign policy.


63.: THE BALLOT
 EXAMINER, 5 DEC., 1830, P. 769

Mill here continues his general argument in favour of the secret ballot,
replying to a leading article in the Standard, 30 Nov., 1830, p. 2,
which responded to his assertion in Edition: current; Page: [205] No.
60. For further discussion, see No. 65. This item is the first article
in the “Political Examiner,” headed as title, and described in Mill’s
bibliography as “The first twelve paragraphs of a leading article on the
Ballot, in the Examiner of 5th December 1830” (MacMinn, p. 13). The
continuation of the argument, directed against The Times, is presumably
by Albany Fonblanque (1793-1872), the radical editor of the Examiner.

the standard has met our challenge of last Sunday, by noticing, we must
say rather than answering, our argument respecting the Ballot. Its
observations are evidently the result of so little consideration, that
we advert to them only because, on a subject of such immense and
rapidly-increasing importance, discussion can scarcely be carried too
far; and also, because a return is due to the courtesy with which we
have always been treated by our able contemporary.

Of that courtesy he has afforded us a new instance, in politely allowing
to the substance of our observations on the Ballot, the name of an
argument,—indeed, he calls it the first argument he ever heard in
defence of the Ballot. Without impugning the truth of this assertion, we
will make free to suggest, that if he has never before met with any
argument for the Ballot, it very probably was because he did not give
himself any great trouble to search for one. Indeed, what could be
expected, if, as he now informs us, his opinion was predetermined by a
consideration which renders all appeal to the merits of the case utterly
superfluous. A sufficient objection to the Ballot, in his mind, he says,
was its novelty. It has never been tried before, in a like case. And if
its never having been tried, is a reason why it never should, this is a
difficulty which is not likely to be soon got over.

On this objection it may be remarked, that if it avail against the
Ballot, it would have held equally against steam-coaches.1 Steam may be
an excellent thing in a manufactory, but when was it ever tried in a
like case?

We need not seriously controvert the proposition, that the plainest
dictates of reason are not worthy to be attended to when they recommend
any thing which is new; nor need we ask, what improvement is there which
may not be called an untried one, if that which is tried in private
societies within every one’s knowledge, and in the political
constitution of the only two great or intellectual countries which
possess a constitution besides ourselves, is to be set aside without
even an examination, on this curious plea.

But these experiments, it seems, are not like cases. Does the Standard
then, really suppose that a political institution was ever tried in a
like case? No two cases in history are alike. This is a logic, by which
all reasoning from experience would be rendered impossible. The Standard
declares itself favourable to a plan of Parliamentary reform which shall
restore our old, and therefore, we presume, our tried institutions. But
does the Standard suppose that the state of England when these
institutions existed, constitutes a like case to the state of England at
the present moment? If that be our contemporary’s real opinion, we
should not Edition: current; Page: [206] despair of persuading him that
any two cases which ever were mentioned together, are like cases.

The Standard has very candidly extracted from our columns the passage of
Mr. Mill’s History of British India, from which our argument was drawn;2
and by the additional publicity which it has given to this passage, it
has, we feel assured, done more good to the cause of the Ballot, than it
can do harm by such a refutation as it has attempted, though repeated
ten times over.

Mr. Mill’s proposition, it will be recollected, was this—that the Ballot
is bad, where the voter’s own interest points in a wrong direction, and
where the restraint which public opinion imposes, is indispensable as a
check to that interest. But if the voter’s own interest accords with the
public good, as it must do when the public themselves are the voters,
this restraint is not necessary; and the Ballot, consequently, is
desirable as often as the voters are liable to be acted upon, either in
the way of bribery or intimidation, by the interests of powerful
individuals.

On this the Standard remarks, that it is not interest, but passion,
which, in all save extreme cases, determines the public conduct of the
mass. By passion must here be meant, feelings of violent liking or
dislike, independent of any calm consideration of the consequences of
the vote either to the voter himself or to others.

If it be true that his vote, supposing it to be known to nobody, would
be given not from reflection, but from passion, it seems to us, we
confess, a singular mode of keeping passion under controul, to make him
vote in the face of a multitude, actuated, as is assumed in the
supposition, by the very same violent passion.

But this is losing sight of the true question. All the effect which can
follow, or is affirmed to follow from the Ballot, is, that the vote will
be given to the candidate whom the voter sincerely prefers. A degree of
perfection greater than this, it is not possible to attain by any
contrivance of polls or ballot-boxes. If it be impossible to constitute
any body of electors but such as will sincerely prefer the wrong man,
there is an end to all rational attempts at a representative government.
But nobody asserts this; and the only question is, what portion of the
community, if allowed to chuse the man whom it prefers, is most likely
to chuse the right man. Sincere and upright persons may differ on this
point; but we should not have imagined that there could have been any
difference of opinion respecting the propriety of taking the suffrages
in such a manner, that those who you have determined ought to be the
chusers, shall really be the chusers; and that the power which you have
pretended to give to them shall not, through the medium of a system of
immorality disgraceful to human nature, be really exercised by a petty
oligarchy, on whom nobody would have the face to propose conferring the
same power directly and avowedly.

Edition: current; Page: [207]
As for passion, as long as men are ill-educated, they will sometimes be
too strongly excited to attend to their true interest. But we are apt to
think that the passions of men whose interest is right, are less
dangerous than the passions of men whose interest is wrong. Amidst all
this exaggeration respecting passion, the real fact is, that the
passions which extend to entire nations, not collected together in mobs,
but insulated in their own homes, are almost invariably, in the present
state of civilization, generous and amiable ones. The danger in the
present condition of society is not from passion, but from selfish
calculation of worldly interest. The universal cry periodically raised,
from John o’Groat’s House to the Land’s End, for the abolition of
slavery, is a specimen of popular passion, such as our own day exhibits:
humane and disinterested in its ends, and consenting to appear impatient
and inconsiderate only because it knows that the assemblies to which it
addresses itself possess coolness sufficient to temper the ardour of the
hottest enthusiasm.

It is no doubt true that many voters do not, and would not, give their
votes upon a judgment of particular public measures, on which they very
often are not, and know that they are not, capable of forming a correct
opinion. But if they have no private ends of their own to serve, and
cannot be made instruments against their conscience for serving the
private ends of other people, they will in general vote for the person
whom they think most honest, and most capable of judging correctly. And
in this they will seldom be mistaken, unless from blind deference to
their superiors in rank and education; for, except where they have
learned, by bitter experience, that the higher classes have the most
miserably petty personal object more at heart than their physical and
moral well-being, the fault of the multitude has never been distrust of
the rich, but too habitual and implicit a confidence in them.


64.: FRENCH NEWS [5]
 EXAMINER, 5 DEC., 1830, P. 771

This article is headed “London, Dec. 4.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55.

m. laffitte has announced to the Chamber of Deputies that he expects to
be enabled to present to the Chamber, in the course of the week which
will have expired when our paper is published, the financial laws of
most immediate urgency, together with a municipal law, and an election
law.1

Edition: current; Page: [208]
Nothing is yet known of the character of the intended municipal law; but
the election law, we lament to say, is expected to fall far short of
even the very moderate parliamentary reform which we announced a short
time ago as being under the contemplation of the French ministry. The
electoral qualification, it is now said, will be reduced, not from 300
to 200 francs of direct taxation, but from 300 to 250; and additional
electors will be admitted at a lower rate of contribution, in sufficient
number to make up, not one elector for every hundred, but one for every
two hundred inhabitants. To these will be added, free from any pecuniary
conditions, the liberal professions composing the second part of the
jury list. The total number of electors will, by this arrangement, be
raised, it is supposed, to about 200,000, so that the ratio of the
amount of the taxes to the number of the electors will not be three
hundred pounds sterling per man, as at present, but about 150l. The
qualification for eligibility will be lowered from 1000 to 500 francs.

If this be the real scheme of the Ministry, it is a pitiful attempt to
compromise with the majority of the Chamber. Why does not M. Laffitte
propose a law of election really adequate to produce a good government,
instead of the monied oligarchy contemplated by the hommes du
lendemain,—and leave to the Chamber the entire discredit of making the
law a bad one by its amendments? But we expected nothing better when we
found that M. de Montalivet was preferred to M. Odilon-Barrot for the
most important department of the ministry.2 There could be no sufficient
reason for rejecting M. Odilon-Barrot, excepting that he was thought to
be too good for the purposes which it was intended that the ministry
should subserve.

We are informed, and the fact is too probable not to be easily credited,
that the disgust occasioned by the acts and evident purposes of the men
who have got the powers of government into their hands, has resuscitated
the republican party. The elevation of Louis Philippe to the throne
without first calling together a Congress like that of Belgium,3 and
remodelling the Constitution, has long been regretted; but those who
regret that a King and a Court were re-established at all, form, we are
assured, a numerous and growing body.

For the present, the national mind seems to be nearly engrossed by
exaggerated rumours of warlike intentions on the part of the great
continental powers. The French are aware of the power they possess in
the sympathies of the people throughout the continent, and the first gun
fired should be the signal for the proclamation of federation with the
oppressed of the hostile nations.

We shall direct the peculiar attention of our readers to the proposed
municipal law, when it makes its appearance.

Edition: current; Page: [209]


65.: CONTROVERSY ON THE BALLOT
 EXAMINER, 12 DEC., 1830, PP. 786-7

This article, continuing the discussion in Nos. 60 and 63, responds to
the Standard, 30 Nov., p. 2, and 8 Dec., p. 2, from the latter of which
Mill quotes. The promised reply by the Standard, incorporating No. 63,
that is referred to by Mill in the opening sentence, actually appeared
on 11 Dec., but presumably after this article was completed. This
leading article, in the “Political Examiner,” is headed as title and
described in Mill’s bibliography as “An article headed ‘Controversy on
the Ballot’ in the Examiner of 12th December 1830”

(MacMinn, p. 13).

the standard has promised a complete reply to our article of last
Sunday, on the Ballot, when it shall have room to re-print the article
itself. This mode of carrying on an important controversy reflects
credit upon our contemporary’s fairness, and is, we confess, very much
to our taste. The Standard will, we know, readily believe that nothing
but the limited space which is at the command of a weekly newspaper,
prevents us from affording a similar proof of our regard for truth, by
inserting in our columns such of his articles as we think it useful to
controvert. They have sufficient claim to such a place on the score of
their intrinsic merits. Powers of vigorous thought, however ill
disciplined, or however misapplied, scarcely ever run so completely to
waste as not to propagate and call forth similar powers in some, at
least, of the minds with which they may come in contact.

The Standard now affirms, that the Ballot does not ensure secrecy; of
this it attempts no proof, except an assertion, that, in the United
States, every man’s vote is known. There is something, to us, very
ridiculous in these appeals from the experience of the human race to the
assumed experience of a single country, which not one of the persons so
appealing has the assurance to pretend that he knows any thing about. In
America, the Ballot may very possibly be an unnecessary protection; for
no voter is in a state of dependence, the voters are too numerous to be
bribed, and the candidates not in circumstances to bribe. Moreover, the
Ballot, in America, may be a mere sham, as at the India House.1 But when
there is a real Ballot, to say that the votes can be known, is a
manifest absurdity. The vote can never be known, unless the voter has it
in his power to Edition: current; Page: [210] shew it. The voter may
tell it; but his telling it when nobody can ever know whether he tells
the truth, will not cause it to be known. Ballot or no ballot, a man’s
vote may be surmised by those who are acquainted with his political
opinions; but the Standard cannot suppose that any one would be so silly
as either to bribe an elector, or lose a respectable tenant on a mere
surmise.

After all that has been said, the Standard seems even now utterly unable
to seize the distinction between the case wherein the ballot is a
safeguard to the honest, and that in which it is a cloak to the knave.
He cannot even yet see, that the temptation sometimes comes from the
interests of people who can influence the voter, and sometimes from the
voter’s own interests: that in the first case the ballot puts an end to
the temptation, while in the second it removes only the restraints. Our
contemporary persists in saying, that if the elector needs the ballot to
protect him against his landlord, the representative must equally stand
in need of it, to remove him from the control of the minister. As if the
sovereign body could need protection against the creature of its own
will; as if the minister had any means of controlling the legislature,
but what the legislature gives him; as if there were any body who does
not know that a ministry exists not by commanding the two houses of
parliament, but by obeying them. These constitutional fictions belong to
a time which is past. Kings and ministers once dictated to the
parliament and to the parliament-makers, but have long since sunk down
into the humbler office of carving for them.

There is a passage in a late article of the Standard, which we cannot
let pass without severer reprobation. After accusing the reformers of
attaching little comparative importance to bribery, as contrasted with
the influence which is exercised by the threat of turning men out of
house and home, our contemporary permits himself to say,

At present when it is known that the electors at such places as Stamford
can be bought at two or three guineas a-head, it is the duty of the
landlord to dispossess all who have proved their corruption by voting
against the legitimate influence of a community of political sentiment,
and of that interchange of kindnesses which always obtains between a
good landlord and his tenants.

We scarcely remember another equally remarkable instance of the
doctrines which men will permit themselves to avow respecting their
fellow-creatures, when they have unhappily become entangled in a bad
cause, and have not manliness or resolution to extricate themselves from
it. Here we have it deliberately declared that every tenant who votes in
opposition to the will of his landlord, must do so from the motive of
bribery, and ought to be treated by other people as if it were legally
proved that he had been bribed; and this whatever be the Lord’s behest,
and whether he be whig, tory, or radical: and such is the
undistinguishing sweep of this morality, that the tenants of Lord Radnor
or of Sir Edition: current; Page: [211] Francis Burdett,2 just as much
as those of the Duke of Newcastle,3 are not only bound to vote as the
landlord commands, but are so utterly in the condition of cattle, so
incapable of a political opinion, a public sympathy, or even a
preference of one man over another, that no possible interpretation can
be put upon their disobedience to the lordly mandate, except that they
have been bribed in actual money—always providing that the superior whom
they have failed to obey, is a good landlord, judice the landlord
himself.

We make no comment on this doctrine. We leave it to the judgment of its
author, who, we have no doubt, in his cooler moments, will recoil from
it. But it is a grievous misfortune to be hampered with a Duke of
Newcastle, and obliged to prove that his black is white.


66.: FRENCH NEWS [6]
 EXAMINER, 12 DEC., 1830, P. 795

This article is headed “London, Dec. 11.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55. The article concludes with a paragraph of
Swiss news, presumably not by Mill.

the french ministry has not yet produced the expected municipal and
election laws, but M. Dupont de l’Eure has introduced a Bill reducing
the number of the Judges in each Court of Assize (as the principal
Courts of Justice are called) from five to three.1 This is a most
important improvement, and a step towards getting rid of those
multitudinous judicatories which destroy individual responsibility, and
neutralize one able judge by associating him with a crowd of feeble or
inexperienced colleagues, who either do nothing or worse.

The clergy of all Christian persuasions existing in France, already
received Edition: current; Page: [212] salaries from the Government: the
Chamber of Deputies has just passed a Bill extending the same provision
to the ministers of the Jewish worship.2


67.: THE TRUCK SYSTEM [1]
 EXAMINER, 19 DEC., 1830, P. 803

This article comments on the debate in the House of Commons on the Truck
System (14 Dec., 1830; PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 1, cols. 1133-82) occasioned
by the request for leave to introduce “A Bill to Consolidate and Amend
the Laws Prohibiting the Payment of Wages in Goods,” 1 William IV (16
Dec., 1830), PP, 1830-31, II, 559-71. It was brought in by Edward John
Littleton (1791-1863), 1st Baron Hatherton, reforming M.P. from 1812
until he entered the Lords in 1835. His bill was enacted as 1 & 2
William IV, c. 37 (1831). For further discussion, see No. 70. This
leading article, in the “Political Examiner,” headed as title, is
described in Mill’s bibliography as “An article headed ‘Truck System’ in
the Examiner of 19th December 1830”

(MacMinn, p. 13).

all mankind have long known what an English Parliament is capable of
when it means ill. If the debate of Tuesday last is to be regarded as a
specimen of what it can accomplish when it means well, we know not what
prayer remains for us to put up, unless for a speedy deliverance from
it.

It is melancholy to see the immense subject of the condition of the
working classes paltered with by miserable trifling. Would not any one
suppose, from the speeches in the House of Commons on Tuesday, that what
makes the labouring population miserable is, not low wages, but the
medium in which wages are paid. Parliament is so wise as to believe,
that the labourer will receive a larger remuneration, if prevented from
receiving it in the shape in which it is most convenient to the master
to give it. Mr. Hume (certainly no enemy to the working people) pointed
out the absurdity of this;1 but nobody, not one man, had sufficient
foresight to perceive that Mr. Littleton’s bill will infallibly lower
wages, instead of raising them.

The object of the bill is to compel the payment of wages in money. Now,
money is a portion of the national wealth, which costs much, but
produces nothing. It administers to no man’s wants. No labourer can
subsist upon it, or use it as tools or materials for production.
Whatever, therefore, enables the business of the country to be done with
less money, increases its productive resources. By being enabled to
dispense with the use of money, the employers of labour are enabled to
render the whole of their capital available for production—to hire
productive labourers to the full amount of their means. But if this bill
passes, Edition: current; Page: [213] they will be obliged to withdraw a
part of their capital from productive employment; to turn off part of
their labourers; and what would have been paid to those labourers, if
allowed to be paid in the form of goods, they will be obliged to export,
for the purpose of merely procuring a circulating medium, wherewith to
pay the wages of the remainder of their labourers.

Thus there will be less real means of employment for labourers than
before; and the existing poverty of the working people will be
aggravated.

Lord Althorp, from whom we expected better things, said, that he would
be against interference between employer and workman, if the contract
were a free one on the labourer’s side; but that it is not so, for the
employer can dictate terms to the labourer.2 But why can the employer
dictate terms to the labourer? Only because there is another labourer
standing by unemployed, who will accept the terms if his fellow-labourer
refuses them. This is what gives the employer undue power; and undue
power he will have, so long as there is a greater number of labourers
than can find employment. So long as this is the case, the labourer must
accept any terms which are preferable to the parish allowance; and is it
really supposed that the matter will be mended, by declaring that his
hard lot shall only be dealt out to him in one particular way? If the
laws of Parliament could get the better of the laws of nature, why not
fix a minimum of wages; that would, at least, be facing the difficulty
boldly. But our legislation resembles a cottage-window in Ireland, with
three of the four panes of glass entirely out, and a rag carefully
stuffed in to close a trifling breach in the only remaining one.

Then it is asserted that the labourer is dependant by being in his
employer’s debt; and it is consequently proposed, for the labourer’s
good, to deprive the employer of any legal means of recovering wages
paid in advance. This amounts to neither more nor less than enacting a
law, that if a working man is in temporary distress, he shall either go
upon the parish or starve. Such is the upshot of all this humanity and
philanthropy.

The Globe had, on Thursday, an excellent article on this question, which
we gladly recommend to universal attention.3 This is one of a class of
subjects which the Editor of that paper has always understood better
than any other of our journalists. The speeches of Mr. Hume and of Mr.
Hyde Villiers are worth reading.4

Edition: current; Page: [214]


68.: FRENCH NEWS [7]
 EXAMINER, 19 DEC., 1830, P. 809

The article is headed “London, Dec. 19.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55. The article concludes with a paragraph on
Belgian and Swiss news, presumably not by Mill.

the death of benjamin constant is a misfortune to the world.1 France,
since the first revolution, has not produced his equal, taking into
account purity of purpose, popular principles, and talents as an orator
and politician. His absence leaves a deplorable hiatus in the Chamber,
which now contains scarcely a man of established reputation and mature
years, joined to opinions in harmony with those of the vast majority of
Frenchmen between twenty and thirty-five. His health had been for some
time declining; but there is no doubt that his death has been hastened
by feelings of grievous disappointment at finding France, at the end of
four months, from the three days of July last, only at the commencement
of, perhaps, a longer and more arduous struggle than that which she
appeared to have brought to so glorious and triumphant a consummation.
There is reason to fear that the bitterness of these reflections was
aggravated by the thought that greater exertions and a more decided
tone, on the part of himself and a few others in August last, might have
given, perhaps, a materially different character to the settlement of
the Constitution.

We are assured that this lamented patriot, almost with his last breath,
expressed to the friends who encircled his death-bed, the regret which
he felt, while dying, that the revolution of July was manquée, and had
fallen into the hands of intrigans.

His house was surrounded by crowds, similar to those which were
congregated round the habitation of Mirabeau in his last moments.

The principal subjects of discussion, in the Chambers, for some time
past, have been the organization of the National Guard, and the
arrangements for putting the army on the war establishment.2 As is
usually the case, when a nation is what it calls “prepared for war,” the
French seem to desire nothing so much as an opportunity for convincing
their neighbours how well prepared they are. A month ago they were as
quiet, as could reasonably be required, on the affairs of Belgium; but
now the insurrection in Poland3 has kindled them into a perfect Edition:
current; Page: [215] flame; so great is the difference in the feelings,
either of a man or of a nation, according as their red coat is on or
off. We have been shocked and disgusted by the language of the leading
French papers on the subject of the Polish revolution. The principle of
non-intervention, on which they insisted so strongly a few weeks ago, is
now scattered to the winds. If a war, unhappily for France and Europe,
were shortly to break out, though undertaken by that country, as it
probably would be, for no selfish object, we greatly fear that, under
its influence, in less than a twelvemonth, the national character would
again be perverted, as it was by Napoleon,—the rage for victory and
conquest would become again the dominant passion in the breasts of
Frenchmen; and the national feeling once turned in that direction, we
know the barefaced profligacy, the systematic and unheard-of disregard
of every principle of international morality, and of the most sacred
rights of independent nations, which made the foreign policy of the
directory, and of the empire, a disgrace to civilisation. That war began
with as much purity of purpose, on the part of the French nation, as the
present one will do, if the French government accepts the invitation;
which, while we now write, is probably under its consideration, to
assist the Poles against the three Robber-powers.

The trial of the Ex-Ministers has commenced.—It is expected that
Polignac, and, perhaps, Peyronnet, will be sentenced to death;
Chantelauze and Guernon-Ranville to some other punishment.4 If Peyronnet
be put to death, and Chantelauze spared, it will be from other causes
than any which will appear on the proceedings; for it is proved, that
Peyronnet was averse to the issue of the ordinances, and that
Chantelauze was not.

The municipal and election laws are still delayed, but the Ministry has
promised speedily to introduce a Bill for the elementary education of
the People.5

M. Isambert laid a proposition before the Chamber, for reducing the
Catholic Church Establishment to the standard of 1802;6 but this was
rejected, without even a public discussion, by virtue of the mischievous
regulation which requires that every proposition must be approved by the
whole, or a certain portion of the Chamber sitting in bureaux or
committees, and deliberating in secret, before it can be even read, much
less discussed, at the public sittings of the Chamber.7

Edition: current; Page: [216]


69.: THE LABOURING AGRICULTURISTS
 EXAMINER, 19 DEC., 1830, PP. 811-12

This article, prompted by the publication of Nassau William Senior’s
Three Lectures on the Rate of Wages (London: Murray, 1830), consists
mostly of an extract from that work. Senior (1790-1864), an active
member of the Political Economy Club, in 1825 had become the first
incumbent of the chair of Political Economy at Oxford (succeeded in 1829
by Whately). The “Poor Laws” in effect at the time of this article went
back to 43 Elizabeth I, c. 2 (1601), and included the law of settlement,
13 & 14 Charles II, c. 12 (1662), and the workhouse law, 9 George I, c.
7 (1722). Senior, a member of the Poor Law Commission, wrote its report,
which resulted in the famous reform of 1834. This article, headed as
title, is described in Mill’s bibliography as “An article headed ‘The
labouring Agriculturists’ in the Examiner of the same date [as “The
Truck System,” No. 67]”

(MacMinn, p. 13).

mr. senior, lately Professor of Political Economy at Oxford, has just
published three lectures on the Rate of Wages, delivered before that
University a few months ago, with the addition of a preface on the
Causes and Remedies of the present Disturbances. The preface in
particular appears to us calculated to produce the most salutary effects
at the present crisis. We extract the following important passage, the
doctrines and sentiments of which have our fullest concurrence:

The poor-laws, as administered in the southern districts of England,1
are an attempt to unite the irreconcilable advantages of freedom and
servitude. The labourer is to be a free agent, but without the hazards
of free agency; to be free from the coercion, but to enjoy the assured
subsistence of the slave. He is expected to be diligent, though he has
no fear of want; provident, though his pay rises as his family
increases; attached to a master who employs him in pursuance of a vestry
resolution; and grateful for the allowance which the magistrates order
him as a right.

In the natural state of the relation between the capitalist and the
labourer, when the amount of wages to be paid, and of work to be done,
are the subjects of a free and open bargain; when the labourer obtains,
and knows that he is to obtain, just what his services are worth to his
employer, he must feel any fall in the price of his labour to be an
evil, but is not likely to complain of it as an injustice. Greater
exertion and severer economy are his first resources in distress; and
what they cannot supply he receives with gratitude from the benevolent.
The connexion between him and his master has the kindliness of a
voluntary association, in which each party is conscious of benefit, and
each feels that his own welfare depends, to a certain extent, on the
welfare of the other. But the instant wages cease to be a bargain—the
instant the labourer is paid, not according to his value, but his wants,
he ceases to be a freeman. He acquires the indolence, the improvidence,
the rapacity, and the malignity, but not the subordination, of a slave.
He is told that he has a Edition: current; Page: [217] right to wages,
but that he is bound to work. Who is to decide how hard he ought to
work, or how hard he does work? Who is to decide what amount of wages he
has a right to? As yet, the decision has been made by the overseers and
the magistrates. But they were interested parties. The labourer has
thought fit to correct that decision. For the present he thinks that he
has a right to 2s. 3d. a day in winter, and 2s. 6d. in summer. And our
only hope seems to be, that the promise of such wages will bribe him
into quiet. But who can doubt that he will measure his rights by his
wishes, or that his wishes will extend with the prospect of their
gratification? The present tide may not complete the inundation, but it
will be a dreadful error if we mistake the ebb for a permanent receding
of the waters. A breach has been made in the sea-wall, and with every
succeeding irruption they will swell higher and spread more widely. What
we are suffering is nothing to what we have to expect. Next year,
perhaps, the labourer will think it unjust that he should have less than
4s. a day in winter and 5s. in summer;—and woe to the tyrants who deny
him his right!

It is true, that such a right could not be permanently enforced;—it is
true, that if the labourer burns the corn-ricks in which his subsistence
for the current year is stored—if he consumes in idleness or in riot the
time and the exertions on which next year’s harvest depends—if he wastes
in extravagant wages, or drives to foreign countries, the capital that
is to assist and render productive his labour, he will be the greatest
sufferer in the common ruin. Those who have property may escape with a
portion of it to some country in which their rights will be protected;
but the labourer must remain to enjoy his own works—to feel that the
real rewards for plunder and devastation are want and disease.

But have the consequences of the present system ever been explained to
the labourer? Is not his right to good wages re-echoed from all parts of
the country? Is he not told—“Dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be
fed?” Does not the Hon. Member, who has affixed this motto to his work,2
assume that the fund out of which the labourer is to be fed is
practically inexhaustible? And can words more strongly imply that his
sufferings arise from the injustice of his superiors? Have not even
magistrates and landlords recommended the destruction, or, what is the
same, both in principle and effect, the disuse of the very machines of
which the object is to render labour more efficient in the production of
the articles consumed by the labourer—in the production of that very
fund on the extent of which, compared with the number to be maintained,
the amount of wages depends? And is there any real difference between
this conduct and the burning of a rick-yard? Threshing-machines are the
present objects of hostility, ploughs will be the next; spades will then
be found to diminish employment; and when it has been made penal to give
advantage to labour by any tool or instrument whatever, the last step
must be to prohibit the use of the right-hand.

Have sufficient pains been taken even to expose the absurdity of what
appears so obvious to the populace—that the landlords ought to reduce
their rents and the clergy their tithes, and then the farmer would give
better wages? If the farmer had his land for nothing, still it would not
be his interest to give any man more wages for a day’s work than his
day’s work was worth. He could better afford it, no doubt, to be paid as
a tax; but why should the farmer pay that tax more than the physician or
the shopkeeper? If the farmer is to employ, at this advanced rate of
wages, only whom he chooses, the distress will be increased, since he
will employ only that smaller number whose labour is worth their
increased pay. If he is to employ a certain proportion of the labourers,
however numerous, in his parish, he is, in fact, to pay rent and tithes
as before, with this difference only, that Edition: current; Page: [218]
they are to be paid to paupers, instead of to the landlord and the
parson; and that the payment is not a fixed but an indefinite sum, and a
sum which must every year increase in an accelerated ratio, as the
increase of population rushes to fill up this new vacuum, till rent,
tithes, profit, and capital, are all eaten up, and pauperism produces
what may be called its natural effects—for they are the effects which,
if unchecked, it must ultimately produce—famine, pestilence, and civil
war.

That this country can preserve its prosperity, or even its social
existence, if the state of feeling which I have described becomes
universal among the lower classes, I think no one will be bold enough to
maintain. That it is extensively prevalent, and that, under the present
administration of the poor-laws, it will, at no remote period, become
universal in the southern districts, appears to me to be equally clear.
But who, in the present state of those districts, will venture to carry
into execution a real and effectual alteration of the poor-laws? Remove,
by emigration, the pauperism that now oppresses those districts, and
such an alteration, though it may remain difficult, will cease to be
impracticable.

Again, the corn-laws, by their tendency to raise the price of
subsistence, by the ruin which they have inflicted on the internal
corn-trade, and the stimulus which they have given to the increase of
the agricultural population, have, without doubt, been amongst the
causes of the present distress; and if, while the population of England
and Wales continues to increase at the rate of 500 persons a-day, the
introduction of foreign corn is subject, under ordinary prices, to a
prohibitive duty, those laws will become every day more mischievous, and
less remediable. But the repeal of those laws, however gradual (and only
a gradual repeal can be thought of), would, under the present pressure
of pauperism, tend to aggravate the agricultural distress. Lighten that
pressure, and we may gradually revert to the only safe system—the system
of freedom.

[Pp. ix-xv.]

Mr. Senior then proceeds to argue, with great force and earnestness, in
favour of systematic emigration, as the only feasible mode of removing
the immediate pressure of pauperism, and rendering practicable the
reform of those abuses in our legislation which have contributed to the
growth of the evil. [Pp. xvi-xix.] And we join our voice to his in
declaring that it is the most imperative among the duties of the
legislation at the present crisis, to inquire and ascertain whether
there be any mode of emigration by which our unemployed labourers might
be removed from penury to comfort, without, by the same operation,
withdrawing so much of our national wealth, as to diminish instead of
increasing the wages of those labourers who remain behind. We believe
that there is such a mode of emigration; and to this momentous subject,
which must engage the attention of Parliament speedily and long, we
shall return.3


70.: THE TRUCK SYSTEM [2]
 EXAMINER, 26 DEC., 1830, PP. 820-1

In response to a correspondent, “W.M.J.,” whose letter is incorporated
in the article, Mill here continues the argument of No. 67. The article,
headed as title, is in the “Political Examiner,” and is described in
Mill’s bibliography as “An article headed ‘Truck System’ Edition:
current; Page: [219] in the Examiner of 26th December 1830” (MacMinn, p.
14). The part of the article following the quotation in full of W.M.J.’s
letter is enclosed within square brackets (here deleted), which perhaps
imply a different authorship; however, there is no other evidence to
support such a conclusion.

we have received a clever letter, signed W.M.J., which, among other
observations on our article of last Sunday, relating to the truck
system, contends that we were mistaken in considering the payment of
wages in goods as a means of economizing the circulating medium. “There
is a manufacturer in Sheffield, for instance,” says our correspondent,
“who pays his wages with drapery goods; but in doing this, how can he be
said to dispense with the use of money? If he does not want it to pay
wages with, he wants it to pay for the drapery goods with; and there
cannot be any difference in the amount, except that which goes to
himself for profit.”

This is plausible, but unsound. The wholesale transactions of one dealer
with another employ very little money. They take place upon credit,
either by means of bills of exchange, or mere entries in the books of
the several dealers. When these mutual credits come to be liquidated,
money is used to pay balances, and nothing more. The great demand for
money is for the retail transactions; and there can be no doubt that
when the employer of labour can contrive to feed and clothe his men by
one great purchase, instead of leaving the men to do it by a hundred
little purchases, the circulating medium is greatly economized.

Besides, even if it were true that the Sheffield manufacturer wanted
money to pay for the drapery goods, as supposed in our correspondent’s
hypothesis, he is allowed by law to make this payment in paper. Now,
paper performs all the functions of currency, without costing any thing,
or absorbing any portion of capital which might else be productively
employed. But the manufacturer cannot by law pay his labourers in paper,
because bankers may not issue paper of a sufficiently low denomination.1
Even, therefore, if the truck system did not economize the currency, it
would still serve to economize the only costly part of the currency. It
is, as our correspondent partly seems to perceive, a substitute for
paper money,—the wisdom of the legislature having thought fit to
interdict the more convenient medium.

Our correspondent challenges us to declare our opinions on the subject
of currency. We should have done so ere this if we had deemed the
occasion favourable, and if we were not, from experience, fully aware
that the public attention cannot be advantageously directed to more than
two or three great subjects at a time. Now, when we are no longer cursed
with a currency, which, being inconvertible into cash, subjected the
amount of the circulating medium to the uncontrolled discretion of a
close corporation, we deem the question between a paper and a gold
circulation to be of immeasurably less importance than is Edition:
current; Page: [220] attached to it by most writers on either side of
the controversy, and probably by our correspondent.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart


To the Editor of the Examiner

Sir,—

As a real admirer, I speak sincerely, not in the ordinary cant of
newspaper correspondents, of the principles of your journal, I have
seen, with pain, your diatribe against the House of Commons for the
manner in which it entertained Mr. Littleton’s measure against the
truck-system;2 a measure which, as a real friend to the manufacturing
labourers, I am actively and zealously engaged in promoting. On their
behalf, I request of your impartiality a little space in your columns
for this humble effort to counteract what I believe to be the very
mischievous tendency of your observations. Allow me to observe, that the
conduct of yourself, and other political economists in this matter, is a
parody on the foolish maxim—“Fiat Justitia Ruat Coelum;”3 that you in
effect say, abandon not one iota of our stern principles, whatever may
be the consequences. In this rigid unbending adherence to a favourite
theory, you forget that you are sacrificing the end to the supposed
means, and lose sight of the very basis of all your science,—the
greatest happiness of the greatest number. What has the House of Commons
done? What does it propose to do? Many thousands of labourers complain
of the frauds and oppressions they suffer from the truck system, not
sufferings arising from the low rate of wages, but frauds and
oppressions, which the workmen of truck-masters groan under, peculiar to
themselves, and which are not shared by the workmen of money-paying
masters in the same manufactures in the same districts. To prevent this
fraud, we require, that is, we ask for no more than that all contracts
between master and workman shall be made, and shall be paid in a medium
which does not admit of fraud, and in which the magistrate can
understand the rights of, and administer justice between, the parties;
instead of in any system of barter, in which it is impossible for the
magistrate to know the value that passes between the parties, and
consequently impossible for him to do justice to him that is defrauded
and oppressed. This is no great restriction on the liberty of contracts.
For the truck-master may still keep his store instead of his Tommy-shop,
still add the profits of the retailer to those of the manufacturer,—the
law merely interfering to provide that the wages of the workman shall be
paid in that value which alone the [sic] can ascertain, leaves him to
have any dealings he pleases afterwards to have with his master. The
continuance of the system has produced a violent discontent, hourly
increasing: the money-paying masters, unable to compete with the
truck-masters, must either follow the same system, adding immensely to
this discontent, or, what many of them would do, stop their works, and
turn their men adrift, denouncing the truck system as the cause. The
consequence would be, the instant rising of the men, in riots first
directed against truck-masters and their property—and where afterwards,
who could calculate? What force could check, what concessions or reasons
would soothe or control a mob of a hundred thousand persons, flushed
with riot and success, and justly complaining of the apathy of the
government and Parliament to their sufferings and complaints? The
consequences to the kingdom, who could foresee? What character the mob
would assume, or what designs it might be led to entertain? And yet
there are political economists who would incur this, rather than yield
one iota of their theories, and blame the government for not partaking
the same strange temerity.

Is there any thing new or wrong in the principle of legislation which
would interfere Edition: current; Page: [221] with contracts, when the
consequences of those contracts may be so prejudicial to others, to the
community?

The table of the House of Commons groans with proofs, the experience of
centuries shows that the Truck System invariably leads to the grossest
frauds; and there is nothing either new or strange in the principle of
law that prohibits contracts between parties, even when the parties are
perfectly free agents, where those contracts are injurious to public
morality.

But the workman is not a free agent. A workman once entered into the
employment of a master is not free; his poverty, the lowness of his
wages, the law of settlement, render it impossible for him to leave his
service, to remain one, two, or three weeks idle, to travel to other
parishes in search of an employer;4 and he is obliged, therefore, to
submit to the exactions and frauds of an oppressive and fraudulent
master. The workman is not upon equal terms—And why is he not? Because
of the law of settlement, and because of those corn laws, and tithe
laws5 which create a factitious, not a natural superabundance of
population, and cause the workman’s poverty as effectually as if they
were enacted for the express and avowed purpose. We do not wish to
controul the laws of nature by acts of parliament; but we do wish, by
act of parliament, to relieve the workman from some of the evils of the
undue advantages which other acts of parliament have given his employer;
and which we are not able to repeal.

You say that the effect of the law would be to lower wages. How is the
truck-master’s paying in money, instead of in goods, to make the
money-paying masters who are still the majority (thank Heaven!) reduce
their wages to their men? How is the necessity of purchasing more gold
for the extra circulation to diminish the sale of iron, or the quantity
of employment which the masters would have to give? If the present
masters’ capital is unsufficient, of course other capital would flow
into the trade to make the supply equal to the demand. If more gold be
required for circulation in consequence, (which is very doubtful
considering the amount of capital that lies idle) it would, I admit,
cost the country at large something to get that gold. But is that a
price we should hesitate to pay, to get rid of a system which defrauds,
oppresses, and degrades the workman, and which has brought the midland
counties to the verge of a fearful convulsion? Assuredly not.—At all
events, to permit paper, and not to permit truck, would be the proper
way to get rid of that burden.

W.M.J.

In the last sentence our correspondent has, in our opinion, approached
to the true practical conclusion. “To permit paper,” with proper
securities for the solvency of the issuers, would effectually abolish
the truck system: “not to permit truck,” would then be superfluous
legislation. Paper-money is the most commodious, and might be made the
safest of all modes of economizing a costly medium of exchange. It is
found so in Scotland, where the securities against its abuse approach to
the utmost limit of completeness and perfection yet reached by any human
institution. From the day when the Legislature, instead of fortifying
the small-note circulation by the proper securities, thought proper to
abolish it, Edition: current; Page: [222] Parliament has been engaged,
as was foreseen and foretold at the time, in an incessant and constantly
recurring warfare against all manner of worse modes of effecting that
which a properly regulated paper-money accomplishes in a good mode. The
truck system is one of those worse modes; and it is worse, simply
because, as our correspondent observes, it increases the difficulty of
enforcing contracts, and holding parties to the terms of their bargain.

That it is attended with this inconvenience, we have no doubt; but that
it can therefore be a cause of impoverishment to the labouring classes
in general, we cannot admit. We request the attention of our
correspondent to a simple argument. If the truck-master, after paying
nominally two shillings a-day to his men, cheats them of sixpence a-day
by overcharges in the prices of goods sold at his store, it is evidently
the same thing as if he gave to each of them eighteen-pence a-day, and
no more. Now, is it not evident, that by giving only eighteen-pence
a-day, either directly or indirectly, he is enabled to employ, with a
given capital, a greater number of men? And as it is not denied that he
now employs men to the full extent of his capital, is it not clear that,
if compelled to give two shillings a-day, he must throw a part of his
labourers out of employment? The competition of those extra labourers,
who would be altogether unemployed if the manufacturer were forced to
give really adequate wages, is the true cause which compels the working
people to accept wages that are not adequate. To abolish truck would not
raise their real wages to the standard of their nominal ones, but would
lower their nominal wages to the level of their real ones; and even
lower, unless, by the introduction of paper, the necessity were spared
of converting productive capital into idle gold and silver.

We have only room further to assure our correspondent, that he wrongs us
in supposing that we are tenacious of a general principle without
regarding specific consequences. Every general principle that is worth a
rush, foresees and provides for all possible consequences; but a man who
is not absurdly confident in his own foresight, looks carefully into
details, as we always do, not only to avoid error in the application of
his principles, but also to guard himself against latent errors in the
principles themselves.


71.: FRENCH NEWS [8]
 EXAMINER, 26 DEC., 1830, PP. 826-7

The implication of the division of the article into two parts (here
signalled by a printer’s rule) is not clear; the initial two paragraphs
of the second part are here included, as being presumably by Mill; the
final two paragraphs of that part, dealing with Polish and Belgian news,
are excluded. The article is headed “London, December 26.” For the entry
in Mill’s bibliography, see No. 55.

Edition: current; Page: [223]
the french ex-ministers have been tried, convicted, and sentenced to
perpetual imprisonment, and the loss of all honours and distinctions.
Polignac is, moreover, pronounced civilly dead. The legal consequence of
this part of his sentence is, that his property is not confiscated—that
punishment being formally abolished by the charter1—but passes to his
natural heirs.

Perpetual imprisonment would be a far heavier punishment than death, if
it were enforced; but in practice, it is sure to amount, at least in
cases of political delinquency, to confinement for two or three years at
the farthest.

No disturbances had broken out when the last advices were received, and
it was hoped that none would take place. We join most earnestly in this
hope; but we have seen, with ineffable disgust, the Parisian
populace—the populace of the three days—reproached with bloodthirstiness
for demanding that great criminals shall be treated as mean ones have
ever been, and as these very persons would have treated the most
intelligent and patriotic men in France, if their criminal enterprise
had been triumphant.

The greatest possible care was evidently taken by the Peers to avoid
putting to the witnesses, during the trial, any question likely to
elicit facts unfavourable to the accused.

The ministers have introduced into the Chamber of Peers a bill for the
more effectual suppression of the slave-trade.2 No law could be more
indispensable, as the connivance of the Bourbon Government has hitherto
been the principal obstacle to the entire rooting out of that abominable
traffic.

The ministry have, moreover, introduced a bill into the Chamber of
Deputies, granting to the King a civil list of 18 millions a year—about
£720,000 sterling. This, which is little more than half the amount of
the civil list, which Charles X enjoyed (though he did not think fit to
pay his creditors out of it), has given great, and just,
dissatisfaction—considering the enormous private fortune of Louis
Philippe, and the general wish that no unnecessary pomp should encircle
the throne of a citizen king.3

From accounts received from Paris, up to Thursday evening, it appears
that tranquillity was still maintained, chiefly by the temperance and
excellent conduct of the National Guard, aided by the students of the
Polytechnique School, and the Schools of Law and Medicine.

Polignac, and his fellow-culprits, are to be confined in the fortress of
Ham, in Picardy.

Edition: current; Page: [224]


72.: FRENCH NEWS [9]
 EXAMINER, 2 JAN., 1831, P. 8

This ninth article on French affairs, headed “London, January 2,” is
covered by the bibliographical entry in No. 55. Beginning in 1831,
Mill’s bound set of the Examiner in Somerville College contains, on the
front fly-leaf of each yearly volume, a list of his own articles, with
page numbers. This article is listed as “Article on France.” At the same
time Mill began the practice of enclosing his own articles in square
brackets in his set of the Examiner. Of this article, which is divided
by rules into three parts, only the first two parts are within brackets,
while the third, on Belgian affairs, falls without.

Quand on n’a d’autre politique que de louvoyer selon le temps; quand,
sous prétexte de fuir tout extrême, on évite le vrai comme l’extrême du
faux; quand on étend l’esprit de conservation à tout, même aux abus, on
est fait pour recevoir et non pour dicter des conditions. Assez
long-temps les hommes de cette école ont joui d’une influence funeste;
assez long-temps les habiles d’entre eux ont corrompu le pouvoir par les
suggestions mesquines de leur petite sagesse. Le temps est venu des
esprits fermes et des principes décidés.—Revue Française (the Guizot
Review) for January, 1829. [Vol. VII, p. 268.]

the above passage is a faithful portraiture of the advisers by whom the
King of the French is now swayed. By such advisers princes of honest
intentions and weak judgment have always been ruined. They will be the
ruin of Louis Philippe, who will never more know a tranquil hour while
he remains on the throne.

It has been distinctly notified to the King, that he must now choose
between the new oligarchy and the people. The alternative has been
accepted. He has chosen the oligarchy; and Lafayette, Odilon-Barrot, and
Dupont de l’Eure, are consequently no longer in office.

The breach, therefore, between the people and the government is now as
wide and as ostensible as it was in the time of Charles X: with this
difference, that as the new oligarchy, unlike the old, rests upon a real
foundation of wealth and personal importance; as it has not, like the
Bourbon Government, the most powerful of the constituted authorities,
the Chamber of Deputies, in the ranks of the opposition; as it is not,
therefore, obliged to govern in open defiance of all law, or not at all;
and as it is not likely to be so ignorant of the universal feelings of
the French people as to attempt to force Jesuits and mass-books down
their throats; the future struggle, though probably pacific, will be a
more arduous one than the preceding, and possibly more prolonged.

The revolution of July has left France almost exactly in the position in
which the revolution of 1688 left ourselves. Both revolutions overthrew
the doctrine of divine right; put an end to the political influence of
the Catholic church; and established the omnipotence of Parliament. Both
left the constitution of Parliament a mere oligarchy—but here we trust
the parallel will end. The human mind is further advanced in 1830 than
in 1688, and the French people have more Edition: current; Page: [225]
sense and spirit than to wait a hundred and fifty years before they cry
out for Parliamentary Reform in a voice which will carry all before it.

The ignorant and conceited Newspaper which used to stile itself the
Leading Journal of Europe, appears to be of opinion that invectives
against the Parliamentary Reformers of France are still saleable.1 It
should certainly be the best judge; a successful tradesman is good
authority on the tastes of his customers. We derive some consolation,
however, from the thought, that ever since his memorable panegyric on
the Polignac Ministry, and invectives against the French people for
condemning them untried,2 our contemporary has never allowed a month to
pass without attempting some disgusting appeal to the low prejudices,
the malignant passions, or the dirty self-interest of the British
public; which, within the month ensuing, we have had the satisfaction of
seeing him compelled to eat up, bit by bit, to the very crumbs. These
things have shaken our faith in the infallibility of our contemporary’s
judgment in such matters, and have afforded us the satisfactory
assurance that the reading public are not altogether in so degraded a
state of intellect and feeling, as the daily perusal of his columns, and
the reflection how carefully their contents are manufactured for the
market, might well have inclined us to suppose.

The introduction of the new Election Law3 was fixed for Wednesday last;
we, therefore, shall soon know whether the Ministry, now deprived of all
which constituted its slender popularity, intends to place itself at the
head of the oligarchy, or to see-saw between that body and the people.
One thing, however, is clear; that the people will no longer be trifled
with as they have been. The Chamber, notwithstanding the composition of
its deplorable majority, contains within its body many of the popular
leaders; and their unaccountable inaction and temporizing has caused us
much suspicion and uneasiness. It is now accounted for. Their motive was
the same which so greatly lowered the tone of the opposition journals
while the Ex-ministers were on their trial. They were resolved, and the
resolution does honour to the purity and nobleness of their purposes, to
abstain from all which might excite or agitate the minds of the people,
until it was certain that France would not be exposed to the dangers and
evils of an insurrection for so miserable an object as the blood of four
guilty and wretched conspirators. To avert this evil they had the virtue
to make the greatest Edition: current; Page: [226] sacrifice which
honest public men can make,—that of the favourable moment for advocating
their opinions. They would not assume a popular tone, or introduce
popular measures, while the fears of their opponents might have ensured
a more favourable reception. They postponed the rupture until the enemy
were flushed with undeserved success.

The exemplary demeanour of the National Guard during the last week, who
with equal firmness and gentleness repressed every tendency to tumult on
the part of men whose feelings and purposes were identical with their
own; the general tranquillity of the people of Paris, under
circumstances of all others the most exciting to a people as susceptible
of strong emotions as the French; and the success with which the Law and
Medical and Polytechnic Schools (“boys” and “lads,” as young men of
five-and-twenty are stupidly called by our newspapers),4 exerted for the
preservation of order, the popularity which they owed to their admirable
conduct in July last; all this must have shown to every honest man
throughout France how little reason there is for apprehending anarchical
excesses, and with how little danger political rights might be extended
at least to the National Guard, to say nothing of any larger portion of
the people of France. To the jobbers and intrigans, however, who are at
the head of the new oligarchy, these events inspired no other idea than
that they were now safe from another Revolution, and might exploiter the
people of France just as they pleased.

Although the office of Commander of the National Guard was one which no
one pretended ought to be permanent, all until now had been apparently
agreed in desiring that so long as it could be held by Lafayette it
should continue; but as soon as the popularity of Lafayette was not
indispensable to keep the people quiet, the Chamber passed a vote
abolishing the office, and thereby declaring, in plain terms, that the
Government had no further occasion for his services. He forthwith
resigned, without waiting until the law which was to remove him should
pass through all its stages.5 Being pressed by the King to resume the
office, he refused, except on the two conditions of a more popular
Ministry, and a popular Election Law. These conditions having been
rejected, Dupont and Odilon-Barrot followed the example of Lafayette,
and resigned; together with Edition: current; Page: [227] Mathieu-Dumas,
second in command to Lafayette, and Carbonnel, chief of his staff.6

There are now symptoms of a strenuous and united opposition, both in the
Chamber and without it. We may hope that now at least the scabbard will
be thrown away. Even in the Chamber of 1830, an opposition party headed
by Lafayette, and comprising such men as Dupont, de Tracy, de Cormenin,
Voyer d’Argenson, de Salverte,7 Isambert, and Odilon-Barrot, (alas! that
we cannot add Benjamin Constant), and backed by almost every man in
France under five-and-thirty, is a power which no one dares despise;
and, by earnest and well-directed exertions, is sure of ultimate
victory.

Since the above observations were written, the Election Law has been
presented. It just doubles the number of the electors, making them
180,000 instead of 90,000, and it reduces to 500 francs of direct
taxation, the qualification for eligibility.

This is poor enough, but it is more than problematical whether even this
will be allowed to pass without further alterations by a Chamber
constituted like the present.


73.: THE SPIRIT OF THE AGE, I
 EXAMINER, 9 JAN., 1831, PP. 20-1

This is the first of a series of articles written, Mill says,
“especially to point out in the character of the present age, the
anomalies and evils characteristic of the transition from a system of
opinions which had worn out, to another only in process of being
formed.” The articles, he continues, were “lumbering in style, and not
lively or striking enough to be at any time acceptable to newspaper
readers; but had they been far more attractive, still, at that
particular moment, when great political changes were impending, and
engrossing all minds, these discussions were ill timed, and missed fire
altogether” (CW, Vol. I, p. 181). These articles had one positive
result: they were read by Thomas Carlyle (1795-1881), Scottish historian
and essayist, who praised them as “the first . . . which he had ever
seen in a newspaper, hinting that the age was not the best of all
possible ages” (EL, CW, Vol. Edition: current; Page: [228] XII, pp.
85-6), and sought out their author as a “new Mystic.” It was the
beginning of an anomalous but intense friendship. The title probably
echoes William Hazlitt’s The Spirit of the Age; or, Contemporary
Portraits (London: Colburn, 1825), which includes an account of Bentham.
Hazlitt (1778-1830), man of letters, had in the Examiner itself (1 Dec.,
1816, p. 759) referred to Ernst Moritz Arndt’s Der Geist der Zeit
(1805), from which the term probably originates, and had used the
English version in the London Magazine in April 1820. See also n2 below.

The series of articles has five parts, printed in seven issues (Nos. 77,
82, 92, 97, 103, 107). All appear in the “Political Examiner.” The entry
in Mill’s bibliography reads “A series of Essays headed ‘The Spirit of
the Age’ and signed A.B., in the Examiner of 9th Jany, 23d Jany, 6
Febry, 13th March, 3d April, 15th May, and 29th May 1831” (MacMinn, p.
14). In Mill’s Somerville College set, all are indexed and enclosed in
square brackets. This first article, listed as “The Spirit of the Age,
No. 1,” has two corrections: at 233.41, “it true, is” is changed to “is
true, it”, and at 234.16, “blew” is changed to “blow”.

the “spirit of the age” is in some measure a novel expression. I do not
believe that it is to be met with in any work exceeding fifty years in
antiquity. The idea of comparing one’s own age with former ages, or with
our notion of those which are yet to come, had occurred to philosophers;
but it never before was itself the dominant idea of any age.

It is an idea essentially belonging to an age of change. Before men
begin to think much and long on the peculiarities of their own times,
they must have begun to think that those times are, or are destined to
be, distinguished in a very remarkable manner from the times which
preceded them. Mankind are then divided, into those who are still what
they were, and those who have changed: into the men of the present age,
and the men of the past. To the former, the spirit of the age is a
subject of exultation; to the latter, of terror; to both, of eager and
anxious interest. The wisdom of ancestors, and the march of intellect,
are bandied from mouth to mouth; each phrase originally an expression of
respect and homage, each ultimately usurped by the partisans of the
opposite catch-word, and in the bitterness of their spirit, turned into
the sarcastic jibe of hatred and insult.

The present times possess this character. A change has taken place in
the human mind; a change which, being effected by insensible gradations,
and without noise, had already proceeded far before it was generally
perceived. When the fact disclosed itself, thousands awoke as from a
dream. They knew not what processes had been going on in the minds of
others, or even in their own, until the change began to invade outward
objects; and it became clear that those were indeed new men, who
insisted upon being governed in a new way.

But mankind are now conscious of their new position. The conviction is
already not far from being universal, that the times are pregnant with
change; and that the nineteenth century will be known to posterity as
the era of one of the greatest revolutions of which history has
preserved the remembrance, in the Edition: current; Page: [229] human
mind, and in the whole constitution of human society. Even the religious
world teems with new interpretations of the Prophecies, foreboding
mighty changes near at hand.1 It is felt that men are henceforth to be
held together by new ties, and separated by new barriers; for the
ancient bonds will now no longer unite, nor the ancient boundaries
confine. Those men who carry their eyes in the back of their heads and
can see no other portion of the destined track of humanity than that
which it has already travelled, imagine that because the old ties are
severed mankind henceforth are not to be connected by any ties at all;
and hence their affliction, and their awful warnings. For proof of this
assertion, I may refer to the gloomiest book ever written by a cheerful
man—Southey’s Colloquies on the Progress and Prospects of Society; a
very curious and not uninstructive exhibition of one of the points of
view from which the spirit of the age may be contemplated.2 They who
prefer the ravings of a party politician to the musings of a recluse,
may consult a late article in Blackwood’s Magazine, under the same title
which I have prefixed to this paper.3 For the reverse of the picture, we
have only to look into any popular newspaper or review.

Amidst all this indiscriminate eulogy and abuse, these undistinguishing
hopes and fears, it seems to be a very fit subject for philosophical
inquiry, what the spirit of the age really is; and how or wherein it
differs from the spirit of any other age. The subject is deeply
important: for, whatever we may think or affect to think of the present
age, we cannot get out of it; we must suffer with its sufferings, and
enjoy with its enjoyments; we must share in its lot, and, to be either
useful or at ease, we must even partake its character. No man whose good
qualities were mainly those of another age, ever had much influence on
his own. And since every age contains in itself the germ of all future
ages as surely as the acorn contains the future forest, a knowledge of
our own age is the fountain of prophecy—the only key to the history of
posterity. It is only in the present that we can know the future; it is
only through the present that it is in our power to influence that which
is to come.

Edition: current; Page: [230]
Yet, because our own age is familiar to us, we are presumed, if I may
judge from appearances, to know it by nature. A statesman, for example,
if it be required of him to have studied any thing at all (which,
however, is more than I would venture to affirm) is supposed to have
studied history—which is at best the spirit of ages long past, and more
often the mere inanimate carcass without the spirit: but is it ever
asked (or to whom does the question ever occur?) whether he understands
his own age? Yet that also is history, and the most important part of
history, and the only part which a man may know and understand, with
absolute certainty, by using the proper means. He may learn in a
morning’s walk through London more of the history of England during the
nineteenth century, than all the professed English histories in
existence will tell him concerning the other eighteen: for, the obvious
and universal facts, which every one sees and no one is astonished at,
it seldom occurs to any one to place upon record; and posterity, if it
learn the rule, learns it, generally, from the notice bestowed by
contemporaries on some accidental exception. Yet are politicians and
philosophers perpetually exhorted to judge of the present by the past,
when the present alone affords a fund of materials for judging, richer
than the whole stores of the past, and far more accessible.

But it is unadvisable to dwell longer on this topic, lest we should be
deemed studiously to exaggerate that want, which we desire that the
reader should think ourselves qualified to supply. It were better,
without further preamble, to enter upon the subject, and be tried by our
ideas themselves, rather than by the need of them.

The first of the leading peculiarities of the present age is, that it is
an age of transition. Mankind have outgrown old institutions and old
doctrines, and have not yet acquired new ones. When we say outgrown, we
intend to prejudge nothing. A man may not be either better or happier at
six-and-twenty, than he was at six years of age: but the same jacket
which fitted him then, will not fit him now.

The prominent trait just indicated in the character of the present age,
was obvious a few years ago only to the more discerning: at present it
forces itself upon the most inobservant. Much might be said, and shall
be said on a fitting occasion, of the mode in which the old order of
things has become unsuited to the state of society and of the human
mind. But when almost every nation on the continent of Europe has
achieved, or is in the course of rapidly achieving, a change in its form
of government; when our own country, at all former times the most
attached in Europe to its old institutions, proclaims almost with one
voice that they are vicious both in the outline and in the details, and
that they shall be renovated, and purified, and made fit for civilized
man, we may assume that a part of the effects of the cause just now
pointed out, speak sufficiently loudly for themselves. To him who can
reflect, even these are but indications which tell of a more vital and
radical change. Not only, in the conviction of almost all men, Edition:
current; Page: [231] things as they are, are wrong4—but, according to
that same conviction, it is not by remaining in the old ways that they
can be set right. Society demands, and anticipates, not merely a new
machine, but a machine constructed in another manner. Mankind will not
be led by their old maxims, nor by their old guides; and they will not
choose either their opinions or their guides as they have done
heretofore. The ancient constitutional texts were formerly spells which
would call forth or allay the spirit of the English people at pleasure:
what has become of the charm? Who can hope to sway the minds of the
public by the old maxims of law, or commerce, or foreign policy, or
ecclesiastical policy? Whose feelings are now roused by the mottoes and
watch-words of Whig and Tory? And what Whig or Tory could command ten
followers in the warfare of politics by the weight of his own personal
authority? Nay, what landlord could call forth his tenants, or what
manufacturer his men? Do the poor respect the rich, or adopt their
sentiments? Do the young respect the old, or adopt their sentiments? Of
the feelings of our ancestors it may almost be said that we retain only
such as are the natural and necessary growth of a state of human
society, however constituted; and I only adopt the energetic expression
of a member of the House of Commons, less than two years ago, in saying
of the young men, even of that rank in society, that they are ready to
advertise for opinions.

Since the facts are so manifest, there is the more chance that a few
reflections on their causes, and on their probable consequences, will
receive whatever portion of the reader’s attention they may happen to
deserve.

With respect, then, to the discredit into which old institutions and old
doctrines have fallen, I may premise, that this discredit is, in my
opinion, perfectly deserved. Having said this, I may perhaps hope, that
no perverse interpretation will be put upon the remainder of my
observations, in case some of them should not be quite so conformable to
the sentiments of the day as my commencement might give reason to
expect. The best guide is not he who, when people are in the right path,
merely praises it, but he who shows them the pitfalls and the precipices
by which it is endangered; and of which, as long as they were in the
wrong road, it was not so necessary that they should be warned.

There is one very easy, and very pleasant way of accounting for this
general departure from the modes of thinking of our ancestors: so easy,
indeed, and so pleasant, especially to the hearer, as to be very
convenient to such writers for hire or for applause, as address
themselves not to the men of the age that is gone by, but to the men of
the age which has commenced. This explanation is that which ascribes the
altered state of opinion and feeling to the growth of the human
understanding. According to this doctrine, we reject the sophisms and
prejudices which misled the uncultivated minds of our ancestors, because
we have learnt too Edition: current; Page: [232] much, and have become
too wise, to be imposed upon by such sophisms and such prejudices. It is
our knowledge and our sagacity which keep us free from these gross
errors. We have now risen to the capacity of perceiving our true
interests; and it is no longer in the power of impostors and charlatans
to deceive us.

I am unable to adopt this theory. Though a firm believer in the
improvement of the age, I do not believe that its improvement has been
of this kind. The grand achievement of the present age is the diffusion
of superficial knowledge; and that surely is no trifle, to have been
accomplished by a single generation. The persons who are in possession
of knowledge adequate to the formation of sound opinions by their own
lights, form also a constantly increasing number, but hitherto at all
times a small one. It would be carrying the notion of the march of
intellect too far, to suppose that an average man of the present day is
superior to the greatest men of the beginning of the eighteenth century;
yet they held many opinions which we are fast renouncing. The intellect
of the age, therefore, is not the cause which we are in search of. I do
not perceive that, in the mental training which has been received by the
immense majority of the reading and thinking part of my countrymen, or
in the kind of knowledge and other intellectual aliment which has been
supplied to them, there is any thing likely to render them much less
accessible to the influence of imposture and charlatanerie than there
ever was. The Dr. Eadys still dupe the lower classes, the St. John Longs
the higher:5 and it would not be difficult to produce the political and
literary antitypes of both. Neither do I see, in such observations as I
am able to make upon my contemporaries, evidence that they have any
principle within them which renders them much less liable now than at
any former period to be misled by sophisms and prejudices. All I see is,
that the opinions which have been transmitted to them from their
ancestors, are not the kind of sophisms and prejudices which are fitted
to possess any considerable ascendancy in their altered frame of mind.
And I am rather inclined to account for this fact in a manner not
reflecting such extraordinarily great honour upon the times we live in,
as would result from the theory by which all is ascribed to the superior
expansion of our understandings.

The intellectual tendencies of the age, considered both on the
favourable and on the unfavourable side, it will be necessary, in the
prosecution of the present design, to review and analyse in some detail.
For the present it may be enough to remark, that it is seldom safe to
ground a positive estimate of a character upon Edition: current; Page:
[233] mere negatives: and that the faults or the prejudices, which a
person, or an age, or a nation has not, go but a very little way with a
wise man towards forming a high opinion of them. A person may be without
a single prejudice, and yet utterly unfit for every purpose in nature.
To have erroneous convictions is one evil; but to have no strong or
deep-rooted convictions at all, is an enormous one. Before I compliment
either a man or a generation upon having got rid of their prejudices, I
require to know what they have substituted in lieu of them.

Now, it is self-evident that no fixed opinions have yet generally
established themselves in the place of those which we have abandoned;
that no new doctrines, philosophical or social, as yet command, or
appear likely soon to command, an assent at all comparable in unanimity
to that which the ancient doctrines could boast of while they continued
in vogue. So long as this intellectual anarchy shall endure, we may be
warranted in believing that we are in a fair way to become wiser than
our forefathers; but it would be premature to affirm that we are already
wiser. We have not yet advanced beyond the unsettled state, in which the
mind is, when it has recently found itself out in a grievous error, and
has not yet satisfied itself of the truth. The men of the present day
rather incline to an opinion than embrace it; few, except the very
penetrating, or the very presumptuous, have full confidence in their own
convictions. This is not a state of health, but, at the best, of
convalescence. It is a necessary stage in the progress of civilization,
but it is attended with numerous evils; as one part of a road may be
rougher or more dangerous than another, although every step brings the
traveller nearer to his desired end.

Not increase of wisdom, but a cause of the reality of which we are
better assured, may serve to account for the decay of prejudices; and
this is, increase of discussion. Men may not reason, better, concerning
the great questions in which human nature is interested, but they reason
more. Large subjects are discussed more, and longer, and by more minds.
Discussion has penetrated deeper into society; and if no greater numbers
than before have attained the higher degrees of intelligence, fewer
grovel in that state of abject stupidity, which can only co-exist with
utter apathy and sluggishness.

The progress which we have made, is precisely that sort of progress
which increase of discussion suffices to produce, whether it be attended
with increase of wisdom or no. To discuss, and to question established
opinions, are merely two phrases for the same thing. When all opinions
are questioned, it is in time found out what are those which will not
bear a close examination. Ancient doctrines are then put upon their
proofs; and those which were originally errors, or have become so by
change of circumstances, are thrown aside. Discussion does this. It is
by discussion, also, that true opinions are discovered and diffused. But
this is not so certain a consequence of it as the weakening of error. To
be rationally assured that a given doctrine is true, it is often
necessary to examine and weigh Edition: current; Page: [234] an immense
variety of facts. One single well-established fact, clearly
irreconcilable with a doctrine, is sufficient to prove that it is false.
Nay, opinions often upset themselves by their own incoherence; and the
impossibility of their being well-founded may admit of being brought
home to a mind not possessed of so much as one positive truth. All the
inconsistencies of an opinion with itself, with obvious facts, or even
with other prejudices, discussion evolves and makes manifest: and indeed
this mode of refutation, requiring less study and less real knowledge
than any other, is better suited to the inclination of most disputants.
But the moment, and the mood of mind, in which men break loose from an
error, is not, except in natures very happily constituted, the most
favourable to those mental processes which are necessary to the
investigation of truth. What led them wrong at first, was generally
nothing else but the incapacity of seeing more than one thing at a time;
and that incapacity is apt to stick to them when they have turned their
eyes in an altered direction. They usually resolve that the new light
which has broken in upon them shall be the sole light; and they wilfully
and passionately blow out the ancient lamp, which, though it did not
show them what they now see, served very well to enlighten the objects
in its immediate neighbourhood. Whether men adhere to old opinions or
adopt new ones, they have in general an invincible propensity to split
the truth, and take half, or less than half of it; and a habit of
erecting their quills and bristling up like a porcupine against any one
who brings them the other half, as if he were attempting to deprive them
of the portion which they have.

I am far from denying, that, besides getting rid of error, we are also
continually enlarging the stock of positive truth. In physical science
and art, this is too manifest to be called in question; and in the moral
and social sciences, I believe it to be as undeniably true. The wisest
men in every age generally surpass in wisdom the wisest of any preceding
age, because the wisest men possess and profit by the constantly
increasing accumulation of the ideas of all ages: but the multitude (by
which I mean the majority of all ranks) have the ideas of their own age,
and no others: and if the multitude of one age are nearer to the truth
than the multitude of another, it is only in so far as they are guided
and influenced by the authority of the wisest among them.

This is connected with certain points which, as it appears to me, have
not been sufficiently adverted to by many of those who hold, in common
with me, the doctrine of the indefinite progressiveness of the human
mind; but which must be understood, in order correctly to appreciate the
character of the present age, as an age of moral and political
transition. These, therefore, I shall attempt to enforce and illustrate
in the next paper.6

A.B.

Edition: current; Page: [235]


74.: FRENCH NEWS [10]
 EXAMINER, 9 JAN., 1831, PP. 24-5

For the entry in Mill’s bibliography, see No. 55. The article is headed
“London, January 9.” In the Somerville College index it is listed as
“Article on France”; Mill’s inked closing square bracket comes before
the final paragraph of the article, on Russia and Poland, which is
therefore not included.

a very mischievous regulation of the French Chambers (whose rules are,
in many other respects, superior to those of our parliament) requires
that all propositions, before they can be publicly discussed, shall be
submitted to the Chamber sitting in bureaux or committees, and
deliberating in secret. Unless three of the nine bureaux sanction the
proposition, it drops.1 The bureaux have as yet come to no decision on
the Parliamentary Reform Bill;2 and it is said that there have been
stormy debates in the secret sittings. No one has the least expectation
that the Bill will pass, unless mutilated and made almost worthless.

The popular and the oligarchical party are said to be marshalling and
organizing their strength for the approaching contest; and it is added
that M. Guizot and his friends, with their usual predilection for half
measures, are forming a middle party, and endeavouring to trim the
balance. The fault of these men is not in their intentions; and their
acquirements and powers of mind no one disputes. Their error is a
bigotted and coxcombical devotion to their own ways and their own
disciples; and incapacity of conceiving that the government can go on
well unless it goes precisely as they have settled beforehand.


75.: CONDUCT OF THE UNITED STATES TOWARDS THE INDIAN TRIBES
 EXAMINER, 9 JAN., 1831, P. 25

This article was provoked by commentary on the Message of Andrew Jackson
(1767-1845), military hero and Democratic President of the United
States, 1828-36, in The Times, 4 Jan., 1831, pp. 1-2 (the passage
concerning the Indians is on p. 2), and by the leading articles on the
subject in The Times, 5 Jan., p. 2, and the Standard, 4 Jan., p. 2. A
leading article in “Foreign Intelligence,” it is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A short article on the conduct of the United States
towards the Indian tribes, without heading, in the Examiner of 9th
January 1831” (MacMinn, p. 14). In the Somerville College set it is
listed as “Article on the conduct of the United States towards the
Indians” and enclosed in square brackets; there is one correction: at
236.19, “it” is deleted from the phrase “it is assumed”.

Edition: current; Page: [236]
we have no room this week for any lengthened observations on the Message
of the American President; but we think it an act of bare justice to
take the earliest possible notice of some very mischievous remarks which
have appeared in the Times and in the Standard on that portion of it
which relates to the removal of the Indians. The facts are as
follows:—Several of the States contain within their allotted boundaries
the possessions of some of the Indian tribes. These possessions have
invariably been held sacred; and the Indians have been protected by law
against all attempts to encroach upon them. But in order that the lands
now occupied by these tribes may be appropriated and cultivated by
civilized men, the Government of the United States has proposed to the
Indians to resign their present possessions, and accept others not yet
included within the boundaries of any State, and which it is proposed
should never hereafter be so included. The Indians will therefore retain
these lands for themselves and their posterity. The President informs
Congress that several of the Indian tribes have accepted these terms.

Hereupon a loud wailing from the Times and Standard, on the hardship and
injustice sustained by these unfortunate men, in being turned out to
make room for the descendants of Europeans. The pity of the reader is
invoked for the extermination which is assumed to be their inevitable
lot; and the Times asks “why should no attempt be made to civilize
them?”1 This wise public instructor scarcely ever touches upon any topic
beyond the range of daily conversation without betraying the fact of his
knowing nothing whatever about it. The most prodigal expenditure in a
Government like ours, professedly for a public object, generally proves
nothing but that some of the “proprietors of Parliament,”2 or their
connexions, are to be benefitted thereby. But when a Government like
that of America, parsimonious even to excess, devotes money to any
purpose, it affords such a proof as it is hardly ever in the power of
any other Government to give, of its being deeply in earnest. Now, the
Government of the United States has for years expended, for the purpose
of civilizing the Indians, sums so large, as to form a very important
item in the moderate expenditure of that cheap Government. The conduct
of the United States towards the Indian tribes has been throughout, not
only just, but noble. The Indians have occasionally been unjustly
treated by several of the State Governments, who, like other people, are
not the very best of judges in their own cause; but the Federal
Government has been the guardian and protector of the rights of the
Indians on all occasions, and has Edition: current; Page: [237] recently
been very seriously embroiled with one of the State Governments3 on
their account. We inform the Times—of what it should have known without
our information, viz.—that one of the chief motives which suggested the
removal of the Indians from their present lands was the desire that the
State Governments might no longer have sovereign controul over them, and
that they might be under the exclusive protection of their “great
father,” the Government of the United States.


76.: FRENCH NEWS [11]
 EXAMINER, 16 JAN., 1831, PP. 40-1

For the entry in Mill’s bibliography, see No. 55. The article is headed
“London, January 16.” In the Somerville College set, it is listed as
“Article on France”; Mill’s square brackets exclude four opening
paragraphs on the situation in Poland, and three concluding ones on
Dutch and Belgian affairs; and at 238.7, Mill deleted “above” from the
printed phrase “Chamber above alone”.

the french election law has been referred, as usual, to a select
committee, the composition of which, if it represents in any degree the
intentions of the Chamber, demonstrates that the slender improvements
which the bill offers will be pared down to microscopic tenuity.
Opinions, still narrower than those of the Guizot party, are represented
by no less than four of the nine, and not more than three are supposed
to be favourable to the law as it stands.

The municipal law,1 which originated in the Chamber itself, has been
recently returned by the select committee to which it was referred, and
stands for discussion at an early period. The local bodies, by the
provisions of this bill, are elective by a suffrage tolerably extensive,
but all the good which would otherwise result from the law is
neutralised by an unfortunate provision—that they are elected for six
years, one half being changed triennially.2 They will thus be far less
amenable to public opinion than at present, for being now named and
revocable by the government, they may be turned out when public opinion
Edition: current; Page: [238] declares so strongly against them, as to
make their continuance in office a source of unpopularity to the King
and Ministry.

The bill for reducing the number of judges in each court of assize from
five to three, has passed, after much opposition.3 Neither side
displayed more knowledge of the subject than might have been looked for
in our own country under similar circumstances. M. Renouard, the King’s
Commissioner for introducing the bill, who is not even a member of the
Chamber alone showed any sense of the immense importance of the
principle of undivided responsibility.4

The Ministers are retrenching the public expenditure with good sense and
boldness. They have lowered the enormous salaries of the prefects, and
have abolished a variety of places, with high-sounding titles and
inordinate emoluments, substituting offices with more modest names and
more moderate remuneration.


77.: THE SPIRIT OF THE AGE, II
 EXAMINER, 23 JAN., 1831, PP. 50-2

For the context and entry in Mill’s bibliography, see No. 73. In the
Somerville College copy, the article is listed as “The Spirit of the
Age, No. 2.” There is one inked correction, “power in itself, on earth
or in hell,” being altered to “power on earth or in hell itself”

(245.17-18).

i have said that the present age is an age of transition: I shall now
attempt to point out one of the most important consequences of this
fact. In all other conditions of mankind, the uninstructed have faith in
the instructed. In an age of transition, the divisions among the
instructed nullify their authority, and the uninstructed lose their
faith in them. The multitude are without a guide; and society is exposed
to all the errors and dangers which are to be expected when persons who
have never studied any branch of knowledge comprehensively and as a
whole attempt to judge for themselves upon particular parts of it.

That this is the condition we are really in, I may spare myself the
trouble of attempting to prove: it has become so habitual, that the only
difficulty to be anticipated is in persuading any one that this is not
our natural state, and that it is consistent with any good wishes
towards the human species, to pray that we may Edition: current; Page:
[239] come safely out of it. The longer any one observes and meditates,
the more clearly he will see, that even wise men are apt to mistake the
almanack of the year for a treatise on chronology; and as in an age of
transition the source of all improvement is the exercise of private
judgment, no wonder that mankind should attach themselves to that, as to
the ultimate refuge, the last and only resource of humanity. In like
manner, if a caravan of travellers had long been journeying in an
unknown country under a blind guide, with what earnestness would the
wiser among them exhort the remainder to use their own eyes, and with
what disfavour would any one be listened to who should insist upon the
difficulty of finding their way, and the necessity of procuring a guide
after all. He would be told with warmth, that they had hitherto missed
their way solely from the fatal weakness of allowing themselves to be
guided, and that they never should reach their journey’s end until each
man dared to think and see for himself. And it would perhaps be added
(with a smile of contempt), that if he were sincere in doubting the
capacity of his fellow-travellers to see their way, he might prove his
sincerity by presenting each person with a pair of spectacles, by means
whereof their powers of vision might be strengthened, and all
indistinctness removed.

The men of the past, are those who continue to insist upon our still
adhering to the blind guide. The men of the present, are those who bid
each man look about for himself, with or without the promise of
spectacles to assist him.

While these two contending parties are measuring their sophistries
against one another, the man who is capable of other ideas than those of
his age, has an example in the present state of physical science, and in
the manner in which men shape their thoughts and their actions within
its sphere, of what is to be hoped for and laboured for in all other
departments of human knowledge; and what, beyond all possibility of
doubt, will one day be attained.

We never hear of the right of private judgment in physical science; yet
it exists; for what is there to prevent any one from denying every
proposition in natural philosophy, if he be so minded? The physical
sciences however have been brought to so advanced a stage of improvement
by a series of great men, and the methods by which they are cultivated
so entirely preclude the possibility of material error when due pains
are taken to arrive at the truth, that all persons who have studied
those subjects have come to a nearly unanimous agreement upon them. Some
minor differences doubtless exist; there are points on which the opinion
of the scientific world is not finally made up. But these are mostly
questions rather of curiosity than of use, and it is seldom attempted to
thrust them into undue importance, nor to remove them, by way of appeal
from the tribunal of the specially instructed to that of the public at
large. The compact mass of authority thus created overawes the minds of
the uninformed: and if here and there a wrong-headed individual, like
Sir Richard Phillips, impugns Newton’s discoveries, and revives the
long-forgotten sophisms of the Cartesians, he is not Edition: current;
Page: [240] regarded.1 Yet the fallacies which at one time enthralled
the subtlest understandings, might find, we suspect, in the present day,
some intellects scarcely strong enough to resist them: but no one dares
to stand up against the scientific world, until he too has qualified
himself to be named as a man of science: and no one does this without
being forced, by irresistible evidence, to adopt the received opinion.
The physical sciences, therefore, (speaking of them generally) are
continually growing, but never changing: in every age they receive
indeed mighty improvements, but for them the age of transition is past.

It is almost unnecessary to remark in how very different a condition
from this, are the sciences which are conversant with the moral nature
and social condition of man. In those sciences, this imposing unanimity
among all who have studied the subject does not exist; and every
dabbler, consequently, thinks his opinion as good as another’s. Any man
who has eyes and ears shall be judge whether, in point of fact, a person
who has never studied politics, for instance, or political economy
systematically, regards himself as any-way precluded thereby from
promulgating with the most unbounded assurance the crudest opinions, and
taxing men who have made those sciences the occupation of a laborious
life, with the most contemptible ignorance and imbecility. It is rather
the person who has studied the subject systematically that is regarded
as disqualified. He is a theorist: and the word which expresses the
highest and noblest effort of human intelligence is turned into a
bye-word of derision. People pride themselves upon taking a “plain,
matter-of-fact” view of a subject. I once heard of a book entitled
“Plain Politics for Plain People.” I well remember the remark of an able
man on that occasion: “What would be thought of a work with such a title
as this, Plain Mathematics for Plain People?” The parallel is most
accurate. The nature of the evidence on which these two sciences rest,
is different, but both are systems of connected truth: there are very
few of the practical questions of either, which can be discussed with
profit unless the parties are agreed on a great number of preliminary
questions: and accordingly, most of the political discussions which one
hears and reads are not unlike what one would expect if the binomial
theorem were propounded for argument in a debating society none of whose
members had completely made up their minds upon the Rule of Three. Men
enter upon a subject with minds in no degree fitted, by previous
acquirements, to understand and appreciate the true arguments: yet they
lay the blame on the arguments, not on themselves: truth, they think, is
under a peremptory obligation of being intelligible to them, whether
they take the right means of understanding it or no. Edition: current;
Page: [241] Every mode of judging, except from first appearances, is
scouted as false refinement. If there were a party among philosophers
who still held to the opinion that the sun moves round the earth, can
any one doubt on which side of the question the vulgar would be? What
terms could express their contempt for those who maintained the
contrary! Men form their opinions according to natural shrewdness,
without any of the advantages of study. Here and there a hard-headed
man, who sees farther into a mill-stone than his neighbours, and takes
it into his head that thinking on a subject is one way of understanding
it, excogitates an entire science, and publishes his volume; in utter
unconsciousness of the fact, that a tithe of his discoveries were known
a century ago, and the remainder (supposing them not too absurd to have
occurred to anybody before) have been refuted in any year which you can
mention, from that time to the present.

This is the state we are in; and the question is, how we are to get out
of it. As I am unable to take the view of this matter which will
probably occur to most persons as being the most simple and natural, I
shall state in the first instance what this is, and my reasons for
dissenting from it.

A large portion of the talking and writing common in the present day,
respecting the instruction of the people, and the diffusion of
knowledge, appears to me to conceal, under loose and vague
generalities,2 notions at bottom altogether fallacious and visionary.

I go, perhaps, still further than most of those to whose language I so
strongly object, in the expectations which I entertain of vast
improvements in the social condition of man, from the growth of
intelligence among the body of the people; and I yield to no one in the
degree of intelligence of which I believe them to be capable. But I do
not believe that, along with this intelligence, they will ever have
sufficient opportunities of study and experience, to become themselves
familiarly conversant with all the inquiries which lead to the truths by
which it is good that they should regulate their conduct, and to receive
into their own minds the whole of the evidence from which those truths
have been collected, and which is necessary for their establishment. If
I thought all this indispensable, I should despair of human nature. As
long as the day consists but of twenty-four hours, and the age of man
extends but to threescore and ten, so long (unless we expect
improvements in the arts of production sufficient to restore the golden
age) the great majority of mankind will need the far greater part of
their time and exertions for procuring their daily bread. Some few
remarkable individuals will attain great eminence under every
conceivable disadvantage; but for men in general, the principal field
for the exercise and display of their intellectual faculties is, and
ever will be, no other than their own particular calling or Edition:
current; Page: [242] occupation. This does not place any limit to their
possible intelligence; since the mode of learning, and the mode of
practising, that occupation itself, might be made one of the most
valuable of all exercises of intelligence: especially when, in all the
occupations in which man is a mere machine, his agency is so rapidly
becoming superseded by real machinery. But what sets no limit to the
powers of the mass of mankind, nevertheless limits greatly their
possible acquirements. Those persons whom the circumstances of society,
and their own position in it, permit to dedicate themselves to the
investigation and study of physical, moral, and social truths, as their
peculiar calling, can alone be expected to make the evidences of such
truths a subject of profound meditation, and to make themselves thorough
masters of the philosophical grounds of those opinions of which it is
desirable that all should be firmly persuaded, but which they alone can
entirely and philosophically know. The remainder of mankind must, and,
except in periods of transition like the present, always do, take the
far greater part of their opinions on all extensive subjects upon the
authority of those who have studied them.

It does not follow that all men are not to inquire and investigate. The
only complaint is, that most of them are precluded by the nature of
things from ever inquiring and investigating enough. It is right that
they should acquaint themselves with the evidence of the truths which
are presented to them, to the utmost extent of each man’s intellect,
leisure, and inclination. Though a man may never be able to understand
Laplace, that is no reason he should not read Euclid. But it by no means
follows that Euclid is a blunderer, or an arrant knave, because a man
who begins at the forty-seventh proposition cannot understand it: and
even he who begins at the beginning, and is stopped by the pons
asinorum, is very much in the wrong if he swears he will navigate his
vessel himself, and not trust to the nonsensical calculations of
mathematical land-lubbers.3 Let him learn what he can, and as well as he
can—still however bearing in mind, that there are others who probably
know much with which he not only is unacquainted, but of the evidence of
which, in the existing state of his knowledge, it is impossible that he
should be a competent judge.

It is no answer to what has just been observed, to say that the grounds
of the most important moral and political truths are simple and obvious,
intelligible to persons of the most limited faculties, with moderate
study and attention; that all mankind, therefore, may master the
evidences, and none need take the doctrines upon trust. The matter of
fact upon which this objection proceeds, is happily true. The proofs of
the moral and social truths of greatest importance to mankind, are few,
brief, and easily intelligible; and happy will be the day on which these
Edition: current; Page: [243] shall begin to be circulated among the
people, instead of second-rate treatises on the Polarization of Light,
and on the Rigidity of Cordage.4 But, in the first place, it is not
every one—and there is no one at a very early period of life—who has had
sufficient experience of mankind in general, and has sufficiently
reflected upon what passes in his own mind, to be able to appreciate the
force of the reasons when laid before him. There is, however, a great
number of important truths, especially in Political Economy, to which,
from the particular nature of the evidence on which they rest, this
difficulty does not apply. The proofs of these truths may be brought
down to the level of even the uninformed multitude, with the most
complete success. But, when all is done, there still remains something
which they must always and inevitably take upon trust: and this is, that
the arguments really are as conclusive as they appear; that there exist
no considerations relevant to the subject which have been kept back from
them; that every objection which can suggest itself has been duly
examined by competent judges, and found immaterial. It is easy to say
that the truth of certain propositions is obvious to common sense. It
may be so: but how am I assured that the conclusions of common sense are
confirmed by accurate knowledge? Judging by common sense is merely
another phrse for judging by first appearances; and every one who has
mixed among mankind with any capacity for observing them, knows that the
men who place implicit faith in their own common sense are, without any
exception, the most wrong-headed and impracticable persons with whom he
has ever had to deal. The maxim of pursuing truth without being biassed
by authority, does not state the question fairly; there is no person who
does not prefer truth to authority—for authority is only appealed to as
a voucher for truth. The real question, to be determined by each man’s
own judgment, is, whether most confidence is due in the particular case,
to his own understanding, or to the opinion of his authority? It is
therefore obvious, that there are some persons in whom disregard of
authority is a virtue, and others in whom it is both an absurdity and a
vice. The presumptuous man needs authority to restrain him from error:
the modest man needs it to strengthen him in the right. What truths, for
example, can be more obvious, or can rest upon considerations more
simple and familiar, than the first principles of morality? Yet we know
that extremely ingenious things may be said in opposition to the
plainest of them—things which the most highly-instructed men, though
never for a single moment misled by them, have had no small difficulty
in satisfactorily answering. Is it to be imagined that if these sophisms
had been referred to the verdict of the half-instructed—and we cannot
expect the majority of every class to be any thing more—the solution of
the fallacy would always have been found and understood? notwithstanding
which, the fallacy would not, it is most probable, Edition: current;
Page: [244] have made the slightest impression upon them:—and why?
Because the judgment of the multitude would have told them, that their
own judgment was not a decision in the last resort; because the
conviction of their understandings going along with the moral truth, was
sanctioned by the authority of the best-informed; and the objection,
though insoluble by their own understandings, was not supported but
contradicted by the same imposing authority. But if you once persuade an
ignorant or a half-instructed person, that he ought to assert his
liberty of thought, discard all authority, and—I do not say use his own
judgment, for that he never can do too much—but trust solely to his own
judgment, and receive or reject opinions according to his own views of
the evidence;—if, in short, you teach to all the lesson of indifferency,
so earnestly, and with such admirable effect, inculcated by Locke upon
students,5 for whom alone that great man wrote, the merest trifle will
suffice to unsettle and perplex their minds. There is not a truth in the
whole range of human affairs, however obvious and simple, the evidence
of which an ingenious and artful sophist may not succeed in rendering
doubtful to minds not very highly cultivated, if those minds insist upon
judging of all things exclusively by their own lights. The presumptuous
man will dogmatize, and rush headlong into opinions, always shallow, and
as often wrong as right; the man who sets only the just value upon his
own moderate powers, will scarcely ever feel more than a
half-conviction. You may prevail on them to repudiate the authority of
the best-instructed, but each will full surely be a mere slave to the
authority of the person next to him, who has greatest facilities for
continually forcing upon his attention considerations favourable to the
conclusion he himself wishes to be drawn.

It is, therefore, one of the necessary conditions of humanity, that the
majority must either have wrong opinions, or no fixed opinions, or must
place the degree of reliance warranted by reason, in the authority of
those who have made moral and social philosophy their peculiar study. It
is right that every man should attempt to understand his interest and
his duty. It is right that he should follow his reason as far as his
reason will carry him, and cultivate the faculty as highly as possible.
But reason itself will teach most men that they must, in the last
resort, fall back upon the authority of still more cultivated minds, as
the ultimate sanction of the convictions of their reason itself.

But where is the authority which commands this confidence, or deserves
it? Nowhere: and here we see the peculiar character, and at the same
time the peculiar inconvenience, of a period of moral and social
transition. At all other periods there exists a large body of received
doctrine, covering nearly the whole field of the moral relations of man,
and which no one thinks of questioning, backed as it is by the authority
of all, or nearly all, persons, supposed to possess Edition: current;
Page: [245] knowledge enough to qualify them for giving an opinion on
the subject. This state of things does not now exist in the civilized
world—except, indeed, to a certain limited extent in the United States
of America. The progress of inquiry has brought to light the
insufficiency of the ancient doctrines; but those who have made the
investigation of social truths their occupation, have not yet sanctioned
any new body of doctrine with their unanimous, or nearly unanimous,
consent. The true opinion is recommended to the public by no greater
weight of authority than hundreds of false opinions; and, even at this
day, to find any thing like a united body of grave and commanding
authority, we must revert to the doctrines from which the
progressiveness of the human mind, or, as it is more popularly called,
the improvement of the age, has set us free.

In the mean time, as the old doctrines have gone out, and the new ones
have not yet come in, every one must judge for himself as he best may.
Learn, and think for yourself, is reasonable advice for the day: but let
not the business of the day be so done as to prejudice the work of the
morrow. “Les supériorités morales,” to use the words of Fiévée,
“finiront par s’entendre;”6 the first men of the age will one day join
hands and be agreed: and then there is no power on earth or in hell
itself, capable of withstanding them.

But ere this can happen there must be a change in the whole framework of
society, as at present constituted. Worldly power must pass from the
hands of the stationary part of mankind into those of the progressive
part. There must be a moral and social revolution, which shall, indeed,
take away no men’s lives or property, but which shall leave to no man
one fraction of unearned distinction or unearned importance.

That man cannot achieve his destiny but through such a transformation,
and that it will and shall be effected, is the conclusion of every man
who can feel the wants of his own age, without hankering after past
ages. Those who may read these papers, and in particular the next
succeeding one,7 will find there an attempt, how far successful others
must judge, to set forth the grounds of this belief.

For mankind to change their institutions while their minds are
unsettled, without fixed principles, and unable to trust either
themselves or other people, is, indeed, a fearful thing. But a bad way
is often the best, to get out of a bad position. Let us place our trust
for the future, not in the wisdom of mankind, but in something far
surer—the force of circumstances—which makes men see that, when it is
near at hand, which they could not foresee when it was at a distance,
and which so often and so unexpectedly makes the right course, in a
moment of emergency, at once the easiest and the most obvious.

A.B.

Edition: current; Page: [246]


78.: FRANCE
 EXAMINER, 23 JAN., 1831, P. 55

Here Mill introduces a Paris correspondent, Pierre Martin Maillefer (ca.
1799-?), journalist and member of the Aide-toi Society, whom Mill
probably persuaded in August 1830 (see CW, Vol. XII, p. 63) to write for
the Examiner (see Nos. 95, 99, 117). Maillefer’s lengthy article (pp.
55-6, dated 11 Jan.) follows the three paragraphs here included. The
article, in “Foreign Intelligence,” is headed as title. Described in
Mill’s bibliography as “Paragraphs introductory to a series of letters
from France, in the Examiner of 23d Jany 1831” (MacMinn, p. 14), the
item is listed on the fly-leaf of the Somerville College set as
“Introductory remarks to a French correspondence (by Martin Maillefer),”
and Mill’s part of the article is enclosed in square brackets.

we have succeeded in obtaining the aid of a most valuable correspondent
at Paris, whose first letter appears in this day’s Examiner. England has
newspapers enough, which, while hypocritically affecting zeal for
Parliamentary Reform at home, make it their daily business to re-echo
the most contemptible calumnies propagated by the new Oligarchy against
the Parliamentary Reformers of France. The letters of our correspondent
will be a faithful picture of the opinions, the feelings, perhaps even
the errors, of the younger and more ardent portion of the popular party.
Whatever they know, he knows; whatever they feel, he feels; whatever he
believes, is believed at least by many of the most active and
influential in a party of which he himself is not one of the obscurest
members, and of which his position and his sources of information render
him an adequate representative.

We are not responsible for all the opinions of our correspondent, nor do
we expect that he will never express any sentiments in which we should
disagree. But we can answer for the purity and excellence of all the
public objects, which he, and his friends, have in view. We cannot, of
course, guarantee all the facts which he relates, especially those which
are of the nature of anecdotes; but we are certain that he will affirm
nothing as true, but what is at least, very generally believed; and it
is often of as much, or even of still greater importance and interest,
to know what is thought to be true, than what really is so. We are
convinced, in short, that as nothing will be disguised in these letters,
both the faults and the virtues of the French character, and of the
popular party in particular, will be exhibited in them, with the utmost
fidelity and naïveté; and that here, and no where else, will the English
reader be enabled to judge the more exaltés of the young patriots of
France from their own lips. The very first letter, and the picture which
it exhibits of public opinion in France, exemplify at once the virtues
and the failings most natural to the French people, those connected with
great susceptibility and mobility of character. In the most sanguinary
excesses of the first revolution, as a word would rouse the popular
fury, so a Edition: current; Page: [247] word would calm it: and now,
with manners and habits infinitely softened and improved, the French
retain the same excitability of spirit: the most lively gratitude and
affection towards public men who wish, or seem to wish their good;
suspicion and distrust, easily conceived, and easily renounced;
political tergiversation punished for a time by bitter resentment, but
very slender and inadequate services accepted as a full atonement.

The correspondence will not be continued every week, but as often as
events may require and space permit, or as the reception which it meets
with from the public, may seem to justify.


79.: FRENCH NEWS [12]
 EXAMINER, 23 JAN., 1831, P. 57

This article is headed “London, January 23.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55. In the Somerville College copy, the article is
listed as “Article on France”; and Mill’s square brackets enclose the
part of the article here included (two further paragraphs comment on
Polish and Hanoverian affairs).

during the last week, the French Chamber of Deputies has been
principally occupied with a bill relating to the Sinking Fund; in one
clause of which, the Ministers have sustained what appears to us a
merited defeat.1 They proposed, that the nation should pledge itself
never to cancel any portion of stock until the whole was redeemed; but
to continue paying the interest upon the stock which is bought up, to
augment the fund for the redemption of the remainder. As M. Gautier
observed, this would be to throw the whole burthen of paying off the
debt upon the present generation, although in all probability the next
will have greater resources, and fewer demands upon its finances for
extraordinary expense.2 The clause was thrown out, members of both
oppositions speaking and voting against it.

General Lamarque made another of his vehement exhortations to war.3 He
appears to resemble the other Bonapartist officers in their military
mania, though not in their baser attributes, the low selfishness and
imbecile vanity, which Edition: current; Page: [248] distinguish almost
the whole of Napoleon’s parvenu nobility. M. Mauguin followed with a
speech of considerable ability, full of just observations on the
character of foreign governments, particularly of the English, the
Aristocratical character of which he perfectly understands; but too much
in the same warlike tone.4 That able and highly-principled paper, the
Courrier Français, has answered both speeches in an article, which, we
trust, will be read in every corner of France.5

Addresses from the People and from the National Guard of different parts
of France to Lafayette, lamenting his retirement,6 and to the King,
demanding popular institutions,7 are now to be found in every number of
the French newspapers, and they seem to be as numerous from what were
thought the backward parts of France, as from any others.


80.: THE QUARTERLY REVIEW ON THE POLITICAL ECONOMISTS
 EXAMINER, 30 JAN., 1831, P. 68

Mill in this article replies to “The Political Economists,” Quarterly
Review, XLIV (Jan. 1831), 1-52, by George Poulett Scrope (1797-1876),
liberal M.P. for Stroud, 1833-68, geologist and writer on economics. The
item, headed as title, appears in the “Literary Examiner.” It is
described in Mill’s bibliography as “An article headed ‘The Quarterly
Review on the Political Economists’ in the Examiner of 30th January
1831” (MacMinn, p. 15). It is listed as title and marked as Mill’s in
the Somerville College set.

the number just published of the Quarterly Review, contains an article
headed “The Political Economists,” which exhibits some proofs of thought
and talent, and more of arrogance and self-sufficiency. In criticizing,
sometimes with and sometimes without ground, various doctrines of
various Political Economists, from some part or other of whose writings,
however, he has derived every valuable idea, relevant to the subject,
which his article contains, he is careful to assure the reader on every
topic which he successively takes in hand, that not a word of sense has
been spoken upon it by any of his predecessors: after which he proceeds
to lay down the true theory of the subject, with an unhesitating and
undisguised confidence in his own infallibility, which is not altogether
becoming in one who contends that those who have hitherto written on
this extensive and complicated science, many of whom he will not pretend
to have been any way his inferiors in mental endowments, have fallen
into so many errors.

Edition: current; Page: [249]
Though we have said thus much in dispraise of the spirit in which this
article is conceived, our object in noticing it is to draw attention to
one portion of it, which is on the whole praiseworthy: we mean the
concluding pages,1 in which the writer strongly insists upon the
insufficiency and sterility of all inquiries which relate to the means
by which a community may obtain the greatest accumulation of commodities
possessing exchangeable value, unless followed up by the inquiry how far
the particular nature of those commodities, and the manner in which they
are distributed among the different members of the community, are
conducive to human happiness in the largest sense and upon the most
extended scale. He adds (and on this important truth he dwells at some
length, and in a spirit honourable to his feelings,) that the wealth of
a country is upon a footing most favourable to human happiness, just in
proportion to the number of persons whom it enables to obtain, by their
bodily and mental exertions, a comfortable subsistence; while on the
contrary, a further increase of the wealth of particular individuals
beyond this point, makes a very questionable addition to the general
happiness; and is even, if the same wealth would otherwise have been
employed in raising other persons from a state of poverty, a positive
evil.

These are precisely our opinions, and it is in the spirit of them that
we would wish all legislation to be directed, so far as is consistent
with that secure enjoyment, by every man, of the fruits of his industry,
or that of his ancestors, which is an essential condition of all human
prosperity. But we know not whence the reviewer has derived the idea,
that the political economists of the present day are adverse to these
views; nor do we see much good sense in his complaint that the science,
as it at present exists, is founded upon a wrong principle, because it
professes to inquire only how a nation may be made rich, not how it may
be made happy. It is not usual to find fault with mathematics, for being
conversant only with lines, and angles, and planes, and solids, and
numbers; nor is it ever surmised that mathematical science is founded
upon a wrong basis, because mankind cannot be made happy by means of
that science exclusively. The truth is, that there are, among those who
have studied political economy, the same two kinds of men, into which
the students of any other subject whatever may be divided: there are the
men who know nothing except political economy, and the men whose ideas
and whose feelings habitually comprehend the whole range of moral and
political truth. This latter class of political economists the reviewer
will find to be unanimously, or almost unanimously, of his opinion; and
it is no fault of political economy if the other sort of persons, who
have studied that and nothing else, judge of all practical questions
exclusively by the considerations which their own subject presents to
them, simply because they are incapable of appreciating any others; no
more than the art of dancing is responsible for the Edition: current;
Page: [250] individual absurdity of the dancing-master in Molière—“La
philosophie est quelque chose; mais la danse, monsieur, la danse!”*

We have said thus much, because we are really sick of the crazy outcries
against the political economists, which seem to be rather increasing
than diminishing, at the very time when the public is almost unanimously
adopting most of the opinions which principally excited the original
uproar against them. It is unworthy of a man like this reviewer, who has
really studied the subject sufficiently to have perceived, or at any
rate to have profited by, the immense merits of the writers whom he
attacks, thus to mingle his voice in the vulgar howl of ignorance
against knowledge.


81.: FRENCH NEWS [13]
 EXAMINER, 30 JAN., 1831, P. 72

This article is headed “London, January 30.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55. The article is listed in the Somerville
College copy as “Article on France”; Mill’s brackets indicate that only
the first six paragraphs of this article are by him (it continues for
six more paragraphs on Russia, Poland, and Hanover).

the king of the french, if a letter in the Courrier des Pays-bas is
authentic, has had the inconceivable silliness of announcing to the
Belgian Congress, that if they elect for their king the son of Eugène
Beauharnais, he will not be recognized by the French Government.1 The
sole apparent motive of this act of imbecility, is fear lest some of the
few remaining Bonapartists should think of setting up that individual as
King of France, in consequence of his father’s connexion with the object
of their admiration and regret. This perfectly squares with the accounts
we have heard of the panic terror into which Louis Philippe was thrown,
by a letter which appeared in France from Joseph Bonaparte, asserting,
with an obstinacy Edition: current; Page: [251] worthy of a more
legitimate line, the claims of his nephew, the Duke of Reichstadt, to
the throne.2 Such is Louis Philippe’s terror of the Bonapartists, that
he dares refuse them nothing which they ask for; he has numbers of them
about his house and person like tame mastiffs, not knowing, in his
foolish fear, that the Bonapartist partakes far more of the nature of
the spaniel, and is ever ready to lick the hand which feeds him.

We mentioned last week that addresses were pouring in from the
departments, complaining of the conduct of government, and calling for
more popular institutions. One of the best of these was from the
admirable department of the Meurthe;3 to this several public
functionaries, among others the Préfet, and the Procureur du Roi, were
parties.4 For this the Préfet has been dismissed, and the Procureur du
Roi reprimanded.

The Ministry have been defeated on their bill for altering the mode of
levying a portion of the direct taxes. The subject was well and fully
discussed on both sides, and it appears to us, on consideration, that
the opponents of the measure were in the right.5

A Political Economy Society has been formed at Paris, consisting of
thirty-six deputies of all parties, to meet once every week for the
purpose of discussing among themselves such questions likely to come
before them in their legislative capacity, as require a peculiar
acquaintance with political economy.

The Ministry have at length introduced the promised bill for the
elementary instruction of the people. It establishes a school in every
commune, nearly upon the footing of the excellent parish schools in
Scotland; and we doubt not that it will equal in its results that
memorable example of great effects produced by small means.6

Another bill has been introduced by the Ministers, to remove the
censorship of the theatres, and provide for the trial and punishment of
such offences as may be committed by means of theatrical performances.
Like our libel law, this bill is somewhat vague and indefinite, but it
is to be hoped that French juries will temper it by a large and liberal
interpretation.7

Edition: current; Page: [252]


82.: THE SPIRIT OF THE AGE, III [Part 1]
 EXAMINER, 6 FEB., 1831, PP. 82-4

For the context and entry in Mill’s bibliography, see No. 73. In the
Somerville College set the article is listed as “The Spirit of the Age,
No. 3,” and is marked with enclosing square brackets.

the affairs of mankind, or of any of those smaller political societies
which we call nations, are always either in one or the other of two
states, one of them in its nature durable, the other essentially
transitory. The former of these we may term the natural state, the
latter the transitional.

Society may be said to be in its natural state, when worldly power, and
moral influence, are habitually and undisputedly exercised by the
fittest persons whom the existing state of society affords. Or, to be
more explicit; when on the one hand, the temporal, or, as the French
would say, the material interests of the community, are managed by those
of its members who possess the greatest capacity for such management;
and on the other hand, those whose opinions the people follow, whose
feelings they imbibe, and who practically and by common consent,
perform, no matter under what original title, the office of thinking for
the people, are persons better qualified than any others whom the
civilization of the age and country affords, to think and judge rightly
and usefully.

In these circumstances the people, although they may at times be unhappy
and consequently discontented, habitually acquiesce in the laws and
institutions which they live under, and seek for relief through those
institutions and not in defiance of them. Individual ambition struggles
to ascend by no other paths than those which the law recognizes and
allows. The ruling powers have no immediate interest in counteracting
the progress of civilization; society is either stationary, or moves
onward solely in those directions in which its progress brings it into
no collision with the established order of things.

Society may be said to be in its transitional state, when it contains
other persons fitter for worldly power and moral influence than those
who have hitherto enjoyed them: when worldly power, and the greatest
existing capacity for worldly affairs, are no longer united but severed;
and when the authority which sets the opinions and forms the feelings of
those who are not accustomed to think for themselves, does not exist at
all, or, existing, resides anywhere but in the most cultivated
intellects, and the most exalted characters, of the age.

When this is the posture of affairs, society has either entered or is on
the point of entering into a state in which there are no established
doctrines; in which the world of opinions is a mere chaos, and in which,
as to worldly affairs, whosoever is dissatisfied with any thing or for
any reason, flies at once to an alteration in the conditions of worldly
power, as a means for obtaining something which would Edition: current;
Page: [253] remove what he deems the cause of his dissatisfaction. And
this continues until a moral and social revolution (or it may be, a
series of such) has replaced worldly power and moral influence in the
hands of the most competent: when society is once more in its natural
state, and resumes its onward progress, at the point where it was
stopped before by the social system which it has shivered.

It is the object of the present paper, and of that by which it will be
immediately followed,1 to demonstrate, that the changes in the visible
structure of society which are manifestly approaching, and which so many
anticipate with dread, and so many with hope of a nature far different
from that which I feel, are the means by which we are to be carried
through our present transitional state, and the human mind is to resume
its quiet and regular onward course; a course as undisturbed by
convulsions or anarchy, either in the political or in the moral world,
as in the best times heretofore, but far more favoured than any former
period in respect to the means of rapid advancement, and less impeded by
the effect of counteracting forces.

To begin with the conditions of worldly power.

There are two states of society, differing in other respects, but
agreeing in this, that worldly power is habitually exercised by the
fittest men. One is, when the holders of power are purposely selected
for their fitness. The other is, when the circumstances of society are
such, that the possession of power of itself calls forth the
qualifications for its exercise, in a greater degree than they can be
acquired by any other persons in that state of society.

The former state was exemplified in the best constituted republics of
antiquity, and is now realized in the United States of America: the
latter prevailed throughout most of the nations of Europe in the middle
ages.

In the best of the ancient republics all offices, political or military,
which were supposed to require peculiar abilities, were conferred upon
those who, in the opinion of the best judges, the educated gentlemen of
the country (for such the free citizens of Athens, and, in its best
times, of Rome, essentially were) possessed the greatest personal
qualifications for administering the affairs of the state, and would
administer them according to the best ideas of their age. With how much
wisdom the choice was usually made, is evidenced in the case of Athens,
by the extraordinary series of great men by whom the affairs of that
little commonwealth were successively managed, and who made it the
source of light and civilization to the world, and the most inspiring
and elevating example which history has yet produced, of how much human
nature is capable. In the case of Rome, the same fact is as certainly
demonstrated, by the steady unintermitted progress of that community
from the smallest beginnings to the highest prosperity and power.

Edition: current; Page: [254]
In the United States, where those who are called to power, are so by the
general voice of the whole people, experience equally testifies to the
admirable good sense with which the highest offices have been bestowed.
At every election of a President, without exception, the people’s choice
has fallen on the person whom, as all impartial observers must admit,
every circumstance that the people knew, pointed out as the fittest; nor
is it possible to name one person preeminently qualified for the office,
who has not, if he was a candidate, obtained it. In the only two cases
in which subsequent experience did not confirm the people’s judgment,
they corrected the error on the very first lawful opportunity.2

But supposing that, in communities constituted like the United States,
the holders of power were not really, as in fact they are, the most
qualified persons; they are at least those whom the people imagine to be
so. The people, consequently, are satisfied with their institutions, and
with their rulers; and feel no disposition to lay the blame of their
private ills upon the existing order of society, nor to seek the
improvement of their circumstances by any means which are repugnant to
that order.

In addition to these instances, where the management of the affairs of
the community is in the fittest hands because those hands are
deliberately selected and put in charge of it, there is another class of
cases, in which power is not assigned to him who is already the fittest,
but has a strong tendency to render that person the fittest to whom it
is assigned. The extreme case of this state of society is that of a
Highland clan: and all other small societies of barbarous people are in
the main similar. The chief of a clan is despotic, so far as custom and
opinion and habit can render him so. He is not selected for any
qualities of his, for his office is in all cases hereditary. But he is
bred to it, and practised in it from his youth upwards; while every
other member of the community is bred to, and practised in, something
else, and has no opportunity of training himself to that. The position,
moreover, of the society itself, does not admit of the chief’s being
utterly destitute of the necessary qualifications for leading the clan
in battle, and guiding them in council. It is the condition of his
existence and theirs, that he should be capable of maintaining himself
in circumstances of considerable difficulty. As men generally contrive
to acquire the faculties which they cannot possibly do without, the head
of a clan is scarcely ever absolutely unfit for governing: the clansmen
are fit for executing, and sometimes for advising, but seldom for
commanding. The leader, therefore, is still the fittest, or at the least
as fit as any one else: and the essential character of a natural state
of society is realised, for the people have confidence in those who
manage their affairs.

Between these two states of society, that in which capacity raises men
to power, and that in which power calls forth their capacity, there is
this important Edition: current; Page: [255] difference, that the former
state does not contain in itself the seeds of its own dissolution. A
society which is directed by its most capable members, wheresoever they
are to be found, may doubtless come to an end, as is shown by many
instances, but at least its dissolution is never the direct consequence
of its own organization, since every new intellectual power which grows
up, takes its natural place in the existing social order, and is not
obliged to break it in pieces in order to make itself way. But when the
possession of power is guaranteed to particular persons independently of
their capacity, those persons may be the fittest to-day and the most
incapable to-morrow: and these social arrangements are exposed to
certain destruction, from every cause which raises up in the society
itself, fitter persons for power than those who possess it. For although
mankind, in all ages except those of transition, are ever ready to obey
and love those whom they recognize as better able to govern them, than
they are to govern themselves, it is not in human nature to yield a
willing obedience to men whom you think no wiser than yourself,
especially when you are told by those whom you do think wiser, that they
would govern you in a different manner. Unless therefore this state of
society be so constituted as to prevent altogether the progress of
civilization, that progress always ultimately overthrows it—the tendency
of civilization being on the one hand, to render some of those who are
excluded from power, fitter and fitter for it, and on the other hand (in
a way hereafter to be explained) to render the monopolizers of power,
actually less fit for it than they were originally.

Now, the proposition which I am about to prove is, that the above is a
correct account of the process which has been going on for a
considerable length of time in modern Europe:—that the qualification for
power has been, and is, anything rather than fitness for it, either real
or presumed: that nevertheless the holders of power, for a long time,
possessed, from the necessary circumstances of society, greater fitness
for it than was possessed by any other persons at that time; which
fitness they have for some time been losing, while others through the
advancement of civilization have been gaining it, until power, and
fitness for power, have altogether ceased to correspond: and that this
is one great cause, so far as political circumstances are concerned, of
the general dissatisfaction with the present order of society, and the
unsettled state of political opinion.

From the earliest periods of the nations of modern Europe, all worldly
power has belonged to one particular class, the wealthy class. For many
centuries the only wealth was land, and the only wealthy were the
territorial aristocracy. At a later period, landed wealth ceased to be
so greatly engrossed by a few noble families, and manufacturing and
commercial wealth grew by little and little into large masses. Worldly
power, under which expression I include all direct influence over the
worldly affairs of the community, became proportionably diffused. It
then belonged to two classes, but to them exclusively, the landed
gentry, and the monied class; and in their hands it still remains.

For many ages these were felt by all to be the proper depositories of
power, Edition: current; Page: [256] because they possessed, on the
average, such qualifications for it as no other members of the
community, in the then state of civilization, could rationally hope to
acquire. It cannot, for example, be imagined that the villeins or serfs,
or even the smaller freeholders, in those ages in which nothing was to
be learnt from books, but all from practice and experience, could be so
fit for commanding the nation in battle, or deliberating on its affairs
in council, as those who had been taught to look to these as their
appointed functions and occupations, who had been trained to fitness for
them in every way which was suggested by the conceptions of those times,
and who from constant practice, possessed at least the same kind of
superiority in their business, which an experienced workman possesses
over one who has never handled a tool.

It is not pretended that the barons were in themselves very fit for
power, or that they did not use it very ill; they did so, as history
testifies, to a frightful extent: not that I agree in one-half of all
that is said in their disparagement by many who, if contemporary with
them, would most probably have admired them, having no standard of
approbation but the ideas of their own age. But those may be in
themselves very unfit, than whom, nevertheless, an uncivilized age
affords none fitter: and power, which is not accountable to those
interested in its being properly employed, is likely to be abused, even
though it be held by the most capable persons, not in a rude age only,
but in the most highly civilized one. This is one of those principles
which being true in all states and in all situations in which man has
been found, or in which we can rationally expect to find him, must be
allowed the paramount importance which is due to it, whatever be the
state of society that we are considering. This may not always have been
duly adverted to by the historical school of politicians (by whom, be it
understood, I mean the really profound and philosophic inquirers into
history in France and Germany, not the Plausibles, who in our own land
of shallowness and charlatanerie, babble about induction without having
ever considered what it is, relying on that rhetoric which is defined by
Plato as the art of appearing profoundly versed in a subject to those
who know nothing at all about it).3 I say, those who have endeavoured to
erect an inductive philosophy of history, may be charged with having
taken insufficient account of the qualities in which mankind in all ages
and nations are alike, their attention being unduly engrossed by the
differences; but there is an error on the other side, to which those are
peculiarly liable, who build their philosophy of politics upon what they
term the universal principles of human nature. Such persons often form
their judgments, in particular cases, as if, because there are universal
principles of human nature, they imagined that all are such which they
find to be true universally of the people of their own age and country.
They should consider that if there are some Edition: current; Page:
[257] tendencies of human nature, and some of the circumstances by which
man is surrounded, which are the same in all ages and countries, these
never form the whole of the tendencies, or of the circumstances, which
exist in any particular age or country: each possesses, along with those
invariable tendencies, others which are changeable, and peculiarly its
own; and in no age, as civilization advances, are the prevailing
tendencies exactly the same as in the preceding age, nor do those
tendencies act under precisely the same combination of external
circumstances.

We must not therefore (as some may be apt to do,) blame the people of
the middle ages for not having sought securities against the
irresponsible power of their rulers; persuading ourselves that in those
or in any times, popular institutions might exist, if the many had sense
to perceive their utility, and spirit to demand them. To find fault with
our ancestors for not having annual parliaments, universal suffrage, and
vote by ballot, would be like quarrelling with the Greeks and Romans for
not using steam navigation, when we know it is so safe and expeditious;
which would be, in short, simply finding fault with the third century
before Christ for not being the eighteenth century after. It was
necessary that many other things should be thought and done, before,
according to the laws of human affairs, it was possible that steam
navigation should be thought of. Human nature must proceed step by step,
in politics as well as in physics. The people of the middle ages knew
very well, whether they were oppressed or not; and the opinion of the
many, added to the fear of vengeance from some injured individual, acted
in a certain, though doubtless by no means a sufficient, extent, as a
restraint upon oppression. For any more effectual restraint than this,
society was not yet ripe. To have thrown off their masters, and taken
others, would have been to buy a still worse government at the price of
a convulsion: to contrive, establish, and work the machine of a
responsible government, was an impossibility in the then state of the
human mind. Though the idea had been conceived, it could not have been
realized. Several antecedent stages in civilization had previously to be
passed through. An insurrection of the peasants against their feudal
lords, could, in the nature of things, have only been, what it actually
was, a Jacquerie:4 for any more rational effort there was needed a power
of self-restraint for the purpose of union, and a confidence in each
other, which they are not to be blamed for not having, since it could
only be the slow result of a habit of acting in concert for other
purposes, which, in an extensive country, can only co-exist with a high
state of civilization. So soon as any portion of the people did acquire
this habit of acting together, they did seek better political
securities, and obtained them: witness the rise of the free cities, and
Edition: current; Page: [258] corporations, all over Europe. The people
therefore of the middle ages had as good a government as the
circumstances of the middle ages admitted; their affairs were less badly
managed, in that bad age, by their masters, than they could have managed
them for themselves. The army of Godefroi de Bouillon in the first
crusade, was not quite so efficient an instrument of warfare as that of
the Duke of Wellington, in 1815: but it was considerably more so than
that of Peter the Hermit, which preceded it.5

From these remarks it will be seen how greatly I differ, at once from
those, who seeing the institutions of our ancestors to be bad for us,
imagine that they were bad for those for whom they were made, and from
those who ridiculously invoke the wisdom of our ancestors as authority
for institutions which in substance are now totally different, howsoever
they may be the same in form. The institutions of our ancestors served
passably well for our ancestors, and that from no wisdom of theirs; but
from a cause to which, I am afraid, nearly all the good institutions
which have ever existed, owed their origin, namely the force of
circumstances: but the possessors of power in the present day are not
the natural successors of the possessors of power in that day. They may
show a valid title to inherit the property, perhaps, of the ancient
Barons; but political power descends, as will be found in the long run,
by a different law.

(The conclusion of this Paper in our next.)6


83.: FRENCH NEWS [14]
 EXAMINER, 6 FEB., 1831, P. 88

This article is headed “London, February 6.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55. In the Somerville College set the article is
listed as “Article on France” and square brackets enclose the part here
printed; the excluded parts are the first three paragraphs, on Belgium
and Poland, and the concluding paragraph, on the French Chamber of Peers
passing the bill that was enacted as Bull. 20, No. 85 (10 Feb., 1831),
allowing ministers of the Jewish religion to be paid from public funds

(see No. 66).

the unsettled state of belgium, and the approaching struggle in Poland,
appear to occupy and agitate the French people fare more than that which
is of Edition: current; Page: [259] greater importance to human kind
than the very existence of Belgium and Poland taken together—their own
struggle for good institutions.1

The French are not, as is sometimes asserted, fond of war, but they have
not the deep-rooted abhorrence of it, which so large a proportion of
ourselves have; it is one of our few points of national superiority. The
French are kept out of unjust war, not by a proper sense of its evils,
but by a sentiment of national morality, which forbids infringement upon
the rights of other nations. But it is obvious, that they would be
ready, at the present instant, to seize hold of any just or plausible
ground of quarrel, however trivial, for taking part with the Poles, whom
they consider as engaged in the same cause with themselves; and as in
reality, defending their own frontiers. When once the sword shall be
drawn, and the five hundred thousand French soldiers, now under arms,
shall, with a successful general at their head, be overrunning Europe,
it is quite impossible to foresee for how long a period the progress of
civilization, and that of good institutions all over the world may be
stopped, or even for how large a space it may be thrown back.


84.: THE MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS OF FRANCE
 EXAMINER, 13 FEB., 1831, PP. 98-9

This article was occasioned by the discussion of the municipal reform
law, already frequently alluded to by Mill (see, e.g., Nos. 57 and 76).
It is headed as title and printed in the “Political Examiner.” Described
in Mill’s bibliography as “An article headed ‘The Municipal Institutions
of France’ in the Examiner of 13 Febry. 1830 [sic]” (MacMinn, p. 15), it
is listed as title and marked with square brackets in the Somerville
College set.

debates of great interest and importance are now taking place in the
Chamber of Deputies, on the proposed municipal law. Our daily
journalists, being altogether unaware of the importance of this as of
almost every other topic beyond the range of every-day conversation,
allow the public to remain utterly unacquainted, both with the debates
themselves, and with the facts necessary to understand them. We shall
briefly state the nature of the existing municipal institutions of
France, and of the alterations proposed to be made in them by the
present Bill.

France is divided into departments, and each department into
arrondissements. Each arrondissement is likewise divided into cantons;
but of this last subdivision it is unnecessary to say any thing further
in this place. Below the canton, there remains only the division into
communes or townships, consisting of a town or village, with the lands
appertaining to it.

Edition: current; Page: [260]
At the head of each department is a prefect, at the head of each
arrondissement a sub-prefect, and at the head of each commune a mayor.
The prefect and the sub-prefect are the delegates of the executive, the
subordinate agents or instruments of the general government; and are
therefore, very properly, named by the Crown. The mayor has also to
perform various duties, judicial and administrative, which are delegated
to him by the general government, but he is considered as the
representative, not so much of the Crown as of the commune; appointed,
not so much to take care that the commune performs its duties, as to see
that it obtains its rights; and is therefore supposed to be, and
generally is, one of the principal inhabitants of the place.
Nevertheless, under the odious system of centralization introduced by
Napoleon, and carried still farther by the restored Bourbons, the
principle of which was to annihilate every atom or vestige of power not
emanating from the central government, the mayors as well as the
prefects and sub-prefects are named by the executive.1 In all communes
exceeding, we believe, 3,000 inhabitants, they are appointed directly by
the Crown; where the population is below that number, by the prefect of
the department.

In addition to the prefect, the sub-prefect, and the mayor, there are
also bodies, consisting of from twenty to thirty of the principal
inhabitants or thereabouts, and termed, conseils généraux de
département, conseils d’arrondissement, and conseils communaux or
municipaux. These bodies are not boards, sitting constantly, but a kind
of local parliaments, holding a session of about a fortnight once every
year, and meeting for special purposes at any other time, if called
together by the prefect, the sub-prefect, or the mayor, respectively.
The duties of these councils are to determine what rates shall be levied
for the local purposes of the department, the arrondissement, and the
commune, and to what objects they shall be devoted; to audit the
accounts of the preceding year; and to assess on each inhabitant of the
department his proper share of the direct taxes of the department; for
the chambers only determine upon certain general data what sum shall be
paid by each department on account of each tax (impôt foncier, impôt
mobilier, and portes et fenêtres). The departmental council afterwards
shares out this demand among the several arrondissements, the council of
each arrondissement among the several communes, and the council of each
commune among the inhabitants.

Such are the functions of the various local councils. Their nomination
emanates exclusively from the executive. They are named in every case by
the Crown, or its delegate and representative, the prefect. Such were
the liberties of France under the restoration! and yet there are slaves,
both in this country and in France, who aver that the charter of 1814
was faulty by not giving sufficient power to the Crown!

Edition: current; Page: [261]
The present bill, which originated with the Chamber of Deputies, not
with the ministry, relates to the mayors, and the communal councils,
exclusively, and has for its object, not to make any change in their
functions, but to alter the mode of their nomination. There is a crying
demand for a law for the former of these purposes, as the functions of
the councils comprehend but a small proportion of that large part of the
business of government, which can be most conveniently and
unexceptionably performed by local representative bodies. But any
extension of their powers would be pure evil, while they continue, as at
present, to be named by the government: for if any part of the people’s
business is to be transacted by persons, in the selection of whom they
have no voice, it is better that it should be done at Paris, by the
ministers and the Chamber, who are at least under the influence of the
opinion of a larger public, and who are supposed to be controlled and
restrained by the nation whom they profess to represent.

By the present bill, the municipal councils are to be elected by the
most highly-taxed inhabitants of the commune, in a number amounting on
the average to about one-thirtieth part of the population.2 The mayors
are to be named as heretofore, by the King or the prefect, but they must
be selected from among the municipal councillors.3 The mayor is to
retain his functions for three years, the members of the council for
six, one half going out every three years, but being immediately
re-eligible.4

The debates on the bill afford a tolerable foretaste of those on the
approaching electoral law,5 and it might be added, of those in our own
House of Commons on the bill for Parliamentary Reform.6 The popular
party contend that the suffrage for the local councils ought to be
extended to all who are rated for direct taxes, and are able to read and
write. They say, that the proposed law will throw the powers of the
local councils in the smaller communes entirely into the hands of landed
proprietors, who, though a numerous class in France, will yet, if
invested with a monopoly of power, exercise it for their separate
interests; and will, in particular, make it their grand object to throw
the local expenses off the land, and levy them by octroi, or taxes on
raw produce imported into the town or village, which obviously fall,
with enormously disproportionate weight, upon the poorer classes, and
those who have nothing to support them but their labour. This would be a
monstrous evil. It is admitted that in a new country, rent, not being
the result of labour, is the most proper fund from which the necessities
of the state can be Edition: current; Page: [262] supplied: in France
this has already been done to a large extent, and to undo it would be a
mere confiscation of the earnings of the productive and industrious, to
put into the pockets of a class which in France, we admit, is also for
the most part productive and industrious, that which it has in no
respect earned.

In answer to this are brought forward all the stale common-places, which
are heard whenever a demand is made for irresponsible power; that men of
considerable property are alone fit for managing any of the affairs of
the public, they alone having a stake in the country, and being the
exclusive possessors of intelligence. These insolent assumptions, which
we fear mankind will be condemned to hear for a considerable time
longer, were refuted by the speakers on the popular side, with an
ability and soundness which we wish we could expect to see equalled in
our own Honourable House next month. We rejoice at the proofs afforded
by these debates of the growing strength of the popular party in the
nation. Three highly esteemed deputies, MM. Marchal, Thouvenel, and
Gaëtan de la Rochefoucault, who had never belonged to the extrême
gauche, have made able and energetic speeches, in which they ally
themselves expressly and in the strongest manner with the popular
cause.7 The speech of M. Daunou, and that of M. Isambert, were
excellent.8

As usual, the party which calls itself moderate, had all the
intemperance to itself. It is astonishing to us how the popular leaders
find patience to bear up, without any attempts at retaliation, against
the reproaches heaped upon them every day by an insolent and corrupt
oligarchy, whose shameless greed of places and dignities has equalled or
surpassed anything previously known even in the worst times of the
Restoration.


85.: FRENCH NEWS [15]
 EXAMINER, 13 FEB., 1831, P. 106

The article is headed “London, February 13.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55. The item is listed as “Article on France” in
the Somerville College set, with the paragraphs here included surrounded
by square brackets; the article begins with a paragraph, here excluded,
on Belgian affairs.

Edition: current; Page: [263]
the government of louis philippe appear to be trying a course of
experiment how much the patience of the French people will bear. We
mentioned in our last paper the dismissal of M. Merville, the prefect of
Meurthe, for signing an address, in which wishes were expressed for more
popular institutions.1 This was followed by the resignation of the
sub-prefect, the mayor, his deputy, and many officers of the national
guard.2 Another prefect has since been dismissed for his democratic
inclinations, M. Pons de l’Hérault, prefect of the Jura.3 Such was this
magistrate’s popularity, that a few days previously, on a mere rumour
that he had been, or was about to be recalled, the people of the
neighbouring country thronged into the town, the streets were crowded
with people; deputations waited upon the prefect from all quarters to
ascertain the fact; and a petition to the King, not to remove M. Pons,
was actually sent to Paris, and must have crossed his dismissal on the
road.4

The King has taken off the mask: and in his answer to an address from
Gaillac, a town of some consequence in the south of France, has dropped
at length his hypocritical adulation of the people and the revolution,
and, for the first time, adopted the cant of the stationary or
stagnation party.5 He has thus (whether from cowardice and weakness, or
from original evil intention, we know not, nor need we care,) made his
determination to stand, or, as we devoutly trust will be the case, to
fall, with the new oligarchy. Posterity at least will know, if
contemporaries do not, on whose head the responsibility should rest of
all the evils which may result from another struggle, followed by
another convulsion.


86.: THE BUDGET
 EXAMINER, 20 FEB., 1831, PP. 113-14

Here Mill turns his attention to the British House of Commons, where, on
11 Feb., John Charles Spencer, Lord Althorp, introduced the budget (PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 2, cols. 403-18). The intentions behind the proposals,
stated Spencer, were to reduce the burden on the poor, which could best
be done by improving manufactures and thus increasing employment; to
increase revenue by lowering duties and thereby increasing consumption;
and to improve the distribution of taxes by spreading over the whole
community those which fell on only one part. He proposed to abolish 210
offices, many in Ireland; to Edition: current; Page: [264] reduce duties
on beer, leather, cider, and sugar; to reduce taxes on newspapers, coal,
tallow candles, printed calicoes, glass, and tobacco; and to increase
the tax on wine, timber, raw cotton, and passengers by steam. He also
proposed to impose a one-half percent duty on the sale of funded
property, but the outcry over this last proposal caused its immediate
withdrawal. The debate continued on 14 Feb. in both Lords and Commons
(see ibid., cols. 492-539).

The item, the first in the “Political Examiner,” is headed as title. It
is described in Mill’s bibliography as “An article headed ‘The Budget’
in the Examiner of 20th February 1831” (MacMinn, p. 15), and is listed
as title and marked with square brackets in the Somerville College set.

the budget has given a shock to the influence of the Ministry, from
which, it seems to be the general persuasion that they will hardly
recover. All that class of politicians, so numerous in times of
difficulty, who, in the civil dissensions of the seventeenth century,
were termed “waiters upon Providence,”1 are beginning to desert the
falling house. They are “losing their confidence in the Ministry,” which
from them always means, their confidence in its continuing in place.
Those whose respect for a Cabinet is proportioned to their opinion of
its durability, have lowered the quota of their respect to three months
at most.

It cannot be denied withal, that the present Budget evinces large views
of public good, an enlightened perception of the pernicious working of
our fiscal system, a discriminating selection of the worst parts of it
to be first got rid of, which it would be injustice to compare for a
moment with any of the feeble aspirations of preceding financiers: but,
unhappily, these generous and enlarged projects of improvement are
deformed with blunders of so portentous a magnitude, as have caused all
that is admirable in the general scheme to be passed over with little
attention and no gratitude: and unhappily the Ministers, who like the
remainder of the Parliamentary herd, if they are capable of receiving,
are incapable of originating truth and good sense, are indebted to
others for all their enlightened views; while their blunders, alas! are
all their own.

The taxes which are taken off are such as all who were acquainted with
their operation, had long since pointed out as some of the very worst
which disgrace our fiscal code. These which are to be laid on, the
Ministers, as ministers are wont, reserved in petto, to be first
announced in Parliament, when it was too late to retract with any
dignity; and of course, they underwent no other consideration or
scrutiny than such as could be given them by the feeble, infantine,
ministerial, parliamentary minds of their official originators.

Although the tax of one-half per cent. on the transfer of stock has been
abandoned, which was the least foolish course a ministry could adopt,
which had been so foolish as to propose it; the question which it
involves is too deeply Edition: current; Page: [265] important, and too
certain to recur again in some other shape, to be let pass without a few
words of remark.

A tax on stock is partial taxation; it is taxation imposed upon that
class whose property is, from its very nature, more precarious, less
protected by the feelings which ordinarily attach to property, and more
tempting to financial cupidity, than any other; and it is taxation in
breach of a direct Parliamentary pledge, as clear as words could make
it, which formed as essential a part of the national contract with the
fundholder, as the rate of interest.2

To the assertion, that the proposed tax is partial taxation, in other
words, confiscation, aggravated by a direct breach of faith, Ministers
had no answer to make, but that they intended to impose a similar tax on
the transfer of land, and that their measure was no more a breach of
national faith than was the income tax.3

Neither of these pleas in justification, will bear a moment’s thought.
The land and the funds together, form a very small portion of the
national wealth; and a tax which falls upon them both, and upon nothing
else, is partial taxation no less than if it fell only upon one or other
of them. A large portion of the funds, moreover, change hands as many
times in a year as land does in a century, and would therefore, under
the show and pretext of exact equality, be taxed unequally in the ratio
of one hundred to one. The allusion to the income tax is actually silly.
The income tax was a general measure. The national creditor never
stipulated for exemption from bearing his due share, proportional to his
property, of the public burthens. He stipulated that he should not be
made to pay it in such a way as should enable a profligate ministry and
parliament, under the fraudulent pretence of calling upon him for his
share, to call on him for more than his share, and place the nation in
the disgraceful predicament of a debtor saying to his creditor, God
forbid I should refuse you the interest of my debt, but I am free to
call part of it a tax, and under that name I mean to keep it in my own
pocket.

If the fundholder is not taxed in the same proportion to his property as
other people, it is in the power of Parliament to make the matter
certain, by laying on a uniform tax in proportion to property. But if
inequalities in the pressure of taxation are to be made up for, as this
scheme proposes, by partial taxes on those who are supposed to be
undertaxed, there is so much unavoidable uncertainty, Edition: current;
Page: [266] and so much room for sophistry and quibble, in discussing
whether the fundholder pays his share or less than his share, that he is
the ready victim of any minister, who with plunder in his heart and
jesuitry on his lips, should come down to Parliament with a proposition
for throwing two-thirds of the public burthens upon the shoulders of a
single class; and that, too, the only class whose property the nation
has, by a special obligation, engaged itself to protect.

So far is this from being a hypothetical danger, urged merely for
effect, and unlikely to be realized, that the very tax proposed realizes
it as far as it goes. For can there be a more impudent assumption than
that the fundholder does not pay his due share of the taxes? The rich,
truly enough (and sufficiently to our discredit) are more lightly taxed
than persons of small, or middling fortunes; but the poor fundholder
pays the same taxes as any other poor man, and the rich fundholder pays
the same as any other rich man. The fundholder pays all the assessed
taxes. He pays all the taxes on consumption. He pays the legacy duty in
common with the public in general; this the landholders, in their two
Houses of Parliament, have taken good care that their land should not
pay. There remain only the taxes which fall peculiarly on the land. Now,
without saying any thing of their amount, which has been so grossly
exaggerated; or of the counter-balancing advantage of low wages, which,
to the greatest national detriment, is occasioned by those very taxes;
is there a man in the country who does not know that there has been
enacted a Corn Law for the declared purpose of compensating, and more
than compensating, the landholders for all these taxes, at the cost of
three times the amount, taken from the pockets of all the other classes
of the community, the fundholder included? But the lion’s share of the
plunder of the people does not content our rent-eating oligarchy; they
would have the whole, and, doubtless, will make a desperate effort to
seize and engross it, by means of the approaching Sham Reform. This at
least is certain—that if, when the facts which prove the contrary are so
flagrant and notorious, the impudent pretence is made, that the
landlords bear more than their share of the taxes, and the fundholders
less, it is a sufficient proof how abundantly needful the stipulation
was, which formed part of the contract with the fundholder, that he
should not be called upon to pay any tax, unless in common with all the
rest of the community; for if a pretext can be found for imposing a
partial tax upon him now, when, in the name of Heaven, can such a
pretext possibly be wanting?

The other taxes which are to be laid on, are all more or less
objectionable. The tax on raw cotton is less mischievous certainly than
that on calicoes; but it is justly chargeable, though not quite in an
equal degree, with nearly all the vices which a tax can have, together
with the accidental one of being a new tax, and therefore disturbing
previous expectations and arrangements. It falls heavier on the poor
than on the rich; it impedes the increase of intercourse with foreign
countries; it renders larger capitals necessary, for carrying on all the
branches of manufacture in which cotton is used; it compels the keeping
up of two Edition: current; Page: [267] establishments, one to levy the
tax, and another to pay back as much (according to some) as two-thirds
of it; and it occasions all the frauds inseparable from a system of
drawbacks. And while we are on the subject of drawbacks, we may just
remark, how much eagerness is always shown to prevent a tax from falling
upon our exports, that is to say, upon foreigners, while our own people
are suffered to be taxed à merci et à miséricorde, without a tithe of
the complaints. This keen anxiety for the interests of our merchants,
and indifference to that of the consumers, is quite in keeping with all
the rest of the working of our aristocratical government.

The tax on steam-boat passengers is as indefensible an impost, viewed on
general principles, as can easily be conceived; and it will, besides,
most injuriously affect existing interests. Our fear is, that it is not
sufficiently high to prevent the influx of Irish, which degrades and
pauperizes our labourers; for if it were, nothing could exceed the
delight and gratitude with which we should hail even so bad a means of
effecting so virtuous an end.

The modification of the duties on timber is highly objectionable as an
increased burthen upon a necessary of life and a material of all
manufactures; while it has not, at least if the newspapers have rightly
reported it, the redeeming merit of removing the inequality of taxation
between Baltic and Canada timber.4 If it accomplished this, it would of
itself save the country a sum of one million annually, which is now as
completely lost and sacrificed as if it were thrown into the sea, or
into the fire. But the measure, we fear, is so distant an approach to
this equalization, that its effect in removing the evil of a forced and
unprofitable employment of capital, will scarcely be perceived.

But if these were the best of all taxes, instead of ranking among the
worst, could the ministers hope to gain the least credit with the public
for merely shifting the burthen which oppresses us from one shoulder to
the other, when we are all firmly convinced that such retrenchments are
possible, as would have enabled taxes of this amount to be dispensed
with altogether? What retrenchment, however, is to be expected from a
ministry, which expatiates on its own economy in cutting off an Irish
Postmaster-General, or a Lieutenant-General of the Ordnance, while it
levies nine thousand additional soldiers to fight Swing;5 not having the
common sense which would have taught any ploughboy, that Swing will
range the country for ever, if he continues at large until regular
troops can catch him; nor foreseeing, what has since been boasted of by
the Attorney-General,6 that the common officers of justice would quietly
go to Edition: current; Page: [268] the spot, and take the offenders and
try them and hang them without the smallest impediment.

A Ministry, whose fears can thus far overmaster their reason, may
possibly be sincere in making the monstrous assertion, that the public
service does not admit of any diminution of taxation.7 But where was Mr.
Hume when this was said? Had such a doctrine been advanced by a Goulburn
or a Herries, what bounds could have been set to his indignation?

The Ministry should have taken off the duty on cottons, on sea-borne
coals, on candles, on glass, and reduced those on newspapers and
advertisements,8 without laying on any new tax at all, until they had
time to see, first, what expenditure they could retrench, and next, how
much revenue they would actually lose. The loss of revenue is never
equal to the amount of the nominal sacrifice, because a portion of what
the consumers save is sure to be expended in some other taxable article.
These taxes in particular, as they take from the consumer very much more
than they bring into the public treasury, would, when remitted, have set
at liberty a much larger income than the nominal amount of the tax, and
would consequently have increased in more than the usual degree, the
produce of the other taxes. The abolition of the duty on glass, by
leading to a large export of that article, would have caused increased
imports, and an increase of the customs revenue. Neither must it be
forgotten, that trade and manufactures are now extremely prosperous, and
that an increase of revenue is naturally to be looked for from that
cause alone. The equalization of the duties on wines, one of the best of
Lord Althorp’s propositions, might have been persevered in; and as the
abolition of the duty on glass would, we are informed, have been nearly
a compensation to the wine merchant, for the small increased duty on
Spanish, Portuguese, and German wines, a large increase of consumption
and of revenue might have been expected, and a great extension of
commercial intercourse with France, leading to manifold advantages, and
not without a beneficial effect on the revenue.

If all these sources of increased revenue, together with such
retrenchments as the proprietors of Parliament could be induced to
permit, proved insufficient to supply the deficit occasioned by the
repeal of so many taxes, it would have been a trifling evil to make up
the deficiency for a single year by the issue of, certainly, far less
than a million of exchequer bills. In the meantime, public attention
would have been drawn to the possible necessity of a new tax; the merits
and defects of all those which could occur to any one, would have been
fully canvassed, and the least objectionable, or the least unacceptable,
might have been chosen; unless a Parliamentary Reform, occurring in the
meantime, should bring about (as, if not a mere imposture, it
undoubtedly would) such Edition: current; Page: [269] retrenchment as
would have rendered not these alone, but many others of our taxes
altogether unnecessary.

It is not too late, even now, for the Ministers to adopt this course;
but we fear there is little chance of it.

In giving up the proposed tax on the transfer of land and stock, the
Ministry have abandoned the intended reduction of the duties on tobacco,
and the abolition of those on glass. The first we do not lament; as we
have no hope that a reduction, which would still have left a duty of 600
per cent. would have had the effect expected from it, and which alone
could justify it,—the prevention of smuggling. The change of
determination with respect to the duty on glass, we deeply regret.


87.: FRENCH NEWS [16]
 EXAMINER, 20 FEB., 1831, PP. 121-2

This item is headed “London, February 20.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55. The item is listed as “Article on France” and
enclosed in square brackets in the Somerville College set.

there has been a slight disturbance at paris, in consequence of an
attempt of some old royalists to celebrate mass for the soul of the Duc
de Berri on the anniversary of his assassination; on the occasion of
which celebration royal honours were paid, or believed to be paid to the
bust of the Duke of Bordeaux.1 This so incensed the people, that they
broke into the church, where they destroyed most of the matériel of the
celebration, sparing, however, the painted windows and the pictures, and
afterwards proceeded to the house of the Archbishop of Paris, which they
completely gutted, throwing the furniture into the Seine.2 Tranquillity
seems afterwards to have been completely restored. Several of the
royalist leaders have been arrested. Some say, that their absurd
demonstrations were connected with ulterior designs. They are
sufficiently stupid to have meditated such, but they are also
sufficiently stupid to have acted as they have done for mere bravado,
without any serious designs.

Edition: current; Page: [270]
The discussion on the municipal law still continues.

The Budget for the year has been presented.3 It exhibits some
retrenchments on the ordinary expenses, and a considerable amount of
extraordinary ones, rendered necessary by placing the army on the war
establishment.4 These are to be provided for by the sale of a small part
of the enormous extent of forests belonging to the state.5

We learn from M. Laffitte’s statement, a most satisfactory fact, that,
notwithstanding the late and present commercial embarrassments, and the
temporary privations which they must have caused to the middle and
working classes, the produce of the taxes on consumption exhibits a
decided increase; and this although, or perhaps because, the duties on
wine, which compose a large part of the whole amount, have been
considerably reduced.6

The ministry have lately afforded a poor earnest of their disposition
towards a relaxation of the restrictive system, by which France
partially renounces the use of the natural productiveness of her land
and capital. They have re-established the Board of Trade, under the
presidence of M. de Saint-Cricq, the Vansittart of France.7


88.: THE EMIGRATION BILL
 EXAMINER, 27 FEB., 1831, PP. 130-1

Mill is commenting on “A Bill to Facilitate Voluntary Emigration to His
Majesty’s Possessions Abroad,” 1 William IV (22 Feb., 1831), PP,
1830-31, I, 463-75, introduced on 22 Feb., 1831, by Henry George Grey
(1802-94), Viscount Howick, later 3rd Earl Grey, an M.P. from 1826 until
he succeeded to the peerage in 1845, who was Under-Secretary for the
Colonies 1830-33. For his speech on the Bill, see PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 2,
cols. 875-906. The Bill was well received by the Commons, but was lost
when Parliament was dissolved in April 1831. The item, headed as title,
appears in the “Political Examiner.” Described in Mill’s bibliography as
“An article headed ‘The Emigration Bill’ in the Examiner of 27th
February 1831” (MacMinn, p. 15), the item is listed as title and
enclosed in square brackets in the Somerville College set.

the government has introduced a bill for facilitating voluntary
Emigration, by creating a board of commissioners, authorised to contract
with individuals or with parishes, on the security of their poor-rates,
for conveying pauper labourers, with their own consent, to Canada or
Australia.

Edition: current; Page: [271]
In so far as this measure evinces a just conception of the great cause
of low wages, excessive competition for employment; and in so far as the
board which it will call into existence, may be considered as a
commission for inquiring into the means of rendering the vast productive
resources of our colonies available for the employment and comfortable
subsistence of the unemployed poor of our own country; to that extent
Lord Howick’s bill is an indication of laudable dispositions and an
earnest of improvement. Our praise can go no farther.

We have no faith in the efficacy of any plan of emigration, which, for
every labourer whom it removes, implies the permanent alienation of a
portion of the national capital. Lord Howick states that the expense of
the emigration of a labouring man, his wife, and two children, is
sixty-six pounds, and that their maintenance as paupers costs
twenty-five pounds annually; on which text he proceeds to dissert upon
the benefits of his plan, saying that an annuity of twenty-five pounds
may be redeemed, by the advance of a sum falling short of three years’
purchase.1 But this is not a fair statement of the question. It assumes
that the whole expenditure of the country on account of poor-rates is
pure uncompensated outgoing, without any return. Now this, we admit, is
to a great degree the case at present, but it is so merely from
mal-administration; and mainly from the established mode of managing the
poor piecemeal, by each parish within itself. Undoubtedly every pauper
should be chargeable solely to his own parish, but there is no reason in
the world why he should be set to work within that parish exclusively,
where perhaps there is no employment for him of a more productive
character than drawing gravel. If we had duly-constituted municipal
councils, or, in default of such institutions, an officer named by the
Crown in each county, and bound to find employment for all the paupers
of the county, on public works, in agriculture, in manufactures, in any
manner in short in which their labour could be turned to greatest
account; or what would be still better, if the poor of the county were
farmed by open competition to private contractors, proper securities
being taken that no pauper should be mulcted of his due allowance or
otherwise oppressed; no one, we believe, who has considered the subject,
will doubt, that the paupers of England might be made to reproduce
annually the whole amount of their maintenance, in the same manner as
other labourers reproduce theirs with considerable profit. In this way
the annuity of twenty-five pounds a-year would be redeemed by the
advance of that sum once only; and therefore the present measure, which
requires an advance of sixty-six pounds for the same purpose, is
unthrifty and unadvisable.

Objections of detail present themselves in great numbers against the
proposed mode of facilitating emigration: but the consideration which we
have just stated applies to the principle, and appears to us to be
decisive.

Yet we are friends to emigration; and are persuaded that from it, in
conjunction with other measures, material relief might be afforded to
the Edition: current; Page: [272] labouring classes from the pressure of
their own excessive competition for employment. But, to be entitled to
this praise, the scheme must be such as to pay the expenses of a second
body of emigrants from the produce of the labour of the first.

Every one admits that the labour of a man in England produces very
little; that the labour of a man in Australia or Canada produces very
much; and that every labouring man, who could be removed from England to
either of these colonies, would, by his change of abode, occasion an
increase of the produce of the world, which would suffice in two or
three years to repay, with interest, the expense of his passage. Here
then, by general admission, is on the one hand a value lost, namely what
the pauper would have produced at home, together with the expenses of
his passage; on the other hand, a value created in the colony, exceeding
the value lost; and it is actually given up as an insoluble problem, to
make a portion of the gain available to cover the loss! It is an insult
to the human understanding to pretend that there are no means of making
emigration pay for itself. If the emigration of a moderate number of
labourers in the prime of life were defrayed by an advance from the
treasury, and a portion of what was added to the produce of the colony
by their labour, were exacted in the form of a tax, and appropriated to
form a fund for further emigration, a perennial stream of emigrants
might be kept up without further expense to the mother country, until
Canada, South Africa, and Australia were fully peopled. Whether this
drain could be rendered sufficiently large to prevent overflow—whether
emigration on this principle could ever be sufficient to relieve
over-population at home—can scarcely be known before trial; but the
grounds of hope are amply sufficient to render a trial not only
advisable, but imperative.

The best mode which we have seen proposed, of enabling emigration to pay
its own expenses, is that to which Mr. Robert Gouger, and Mr. Tennant,
the member for St. Alban’s, have so perseveringly called the public
attention—that of fixing a price upon waste land, the highest which
could be levied without so crowding the inhabitants as to lower wages
below their highest rate.2 There is no difficulty or disadvantage in
this measure. The government of the United States Edition: current;
Page: [273] raises a considerable annual revenue from the sale of
unappropriated land; to the great benefit of the inhabitants, which
benefit would be still greater if the tax were higher, as it is almost
certain that the population of the back settlements is even now far more
widely dispersed than is consistent with the most productive employment
of their labour. The same principle has been adopted in part by the
present ministry, in the colonies of New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land. All that is wanting is, that the minimum price of waste land
should be higher; that the system should be established by act of
parliament, not by a mere regulation, revocable at the pleasure of any
colonial minister; and finally, that the produce of the sales of land
should be wholly devoted to emigration, and to the emigration of young
couples, in order that the greatest effect may be produced on the future
growth of population, by the removal of the smallest number of
individuals.


89.: FRENCH NEWS [17]
 EXAMINER, 27 FEB., 1831, P. 136

This article is headed “London, February 27.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55. The item is listed as “Article on France” and
enclosed in square brackets in the Somerville College set.

the late tumults in paris have been viewed by all parties in France in a
far more serious light than the accounts at first received in this
country made them appear to merit. Moderate, time-serving newspapers,
and moderate, time-serving deputies, have now publicly declared their
conviction on the following points:—That it is now obvious that the
National Guard, and the middle classes, at least, of Paris, are not
satisfied with the present state of the government, either in respect to
men or measures;—That, until they obtain a government with which they
are satisfied, the feeling of security will not revive;—That until there
is security, the labouring population will be without work, will be
dissatisfied, a prey to agitators, and ready for continual tumults:
which tumults, so long as they do not endanger human life or private
property, the National Guard will give themselves as little trouble as
possible to suppress. All this has been obvious to every man of common
sense for the last six months; and the popular journals have been
dinning it into the ears of the King and the Chamber since August last.
But they would not listen to Reason, when she came with a gentle
whisper; and now they must be fain both to hear and feel her, returning
with a loud shout and a thundering blow.

One point is now admitted by the unanimous voice of all parties—the
necessity of dissolving the Chamber. This measure, so odious to the
majority a few days since, is now pressed on by them with indecent
precipitation, to escape from the approaching debate on the electoral
law, and have the opportunity of Edition: current; Page: [274]
presenting themselves once again to the same narrow body of
constituents, which elected them before, and by which they believe that
they will be re-elected. The côté gauche are now the opponents of an
immediate dissolution. They were always so. From the beginning they
demanded that the Chamber should (to use their own phrase) make its last
will and testament before it expires; should determine, by an
election-law, to whom the estate which it leaves behind, its
constitutional authority, shall descend.1

The commission, or select committee, on the electoral law, has presented
its report.2 This proposes to lower the electoral qualification from 300
to 240 francs of direct taxes: and that of eligibility from 1000 to 500.
Trifling as is this diminution of the qualification of an elector, it
seems that it will increase the number of the voters to 210,000; and
though nothing short of a million of electors ought to be accepted by
the sincere Reformers, either in this country or in France, even as a
compromise, the chances of some improvement in the composition of the
Chamber even from so inadequate a Parliamentary Reform, if adopted
previous to the dissolution, are sufficient to be worth a hard struggle.

The usual quantity of absurd misapprehension has displayed itself in
England on the subject of the troubles in Paris. The hatred of the
populace to the fleurs-de-lis is partly understood; but their antipathy
to the crosses, and to the priesthood, is, not unnaturally, somewhat
less intelligible to Englishmen who have never stirred from their
fire-side, nor imbibed any ideas but those which it suited the purpose
of some person or other to carry thither. All persons who have conversed
with the working population of Paris must have been forcibly struck with
the intensity of their hatred to the Jesuits, and to les mauvais prêtres
(as they phrase it) generally; a hatred which has partly for its cause,
and partly for its effect, a notion that those against whom it is
directed are capable of the worst of crimes; and we have ourselves
repeatedly heard persons of the lowest class, subsequently to the
revolution in July, expressing their fears that if Louis Philippe
persisted in going about without an escort, some Jesuit would be found
to assassinate him. But the very persons in whom these feelings appeared
to be strongest, always qualified the expression of them, by the
unsolicited and unsuggested acknowledgment, that there must be both
religion and priests. Even at the summary funeral of the victims of
July, who were laid under ground by the collected people in the very
place where they fell, a priest was sent for to perform the usual
ceremonies. The people of Paris, from the highest to the lowest, have
ceased to hate Christianity, and are tired of listening to ridicule of
it: but they detest mortally a political religion; and, although their
minds are more open than they have been for above a generation, to
religious feelings and ideas generally, they are averse from the
Catholic religion, and ready, in a moment of Edition: current; Page:
[275] excitement, to make the most violent demonstrations of hatred to
the Catholic priests. As for the crosses which have been pulled down
from the tops of the steeples, it may not be amiss to state that they
were put up only a very few years ago by the Bourbons, at the expense of
the people, and to their vehement dissatisfaction.

The King seems, of all men in France, to be the least capable of rightly
interpreting the passing events. He has chosen a moment like this for
dismissing from their offices, Odilon-Barrot, the Prefect of the Seine,
and Baude, the Prefect of Police.3 The Times says that Odilon-Barrot is
dismissed for being too liberal, and Baude for not being liberal enough;
and regards the whole proceeding as a specimen of mere trimming;4 but if
this were the case, why was the precise moment selected for removing
Baude, at which he had just delivered a speech reconciling him with the
popular party?5 That speech is the true cause of his dismissal. He is
removed from the same motive as Odilon-Barrot. He is removed because the
King wishes to show that he can be firm; as Charles X was firm when he
issued the ordinances.6 The rule with Kings is to drive the people to
extremity, and then to face their fury by way of showing firmness, and
avoiding the humiliation of a retreat. Weak men never take it into their
heads to be firm, until the time is come, when it is absolutely
necessary to be pliant. Their firmness consists in braving real dangers,
for fear of imaginary ones. The feeble King of the French is terrified
at giving votes to the million richest among thirty-two millions, but
rather than yield an inch to the other thirty-one millions in arms,
impavidum ferient ruinae. Alas! a fool can be as tenax propositi as
Horace’s hero.7

One of those evil counsellors whom nature seems to have formed as the
appointed means to bring the mighty to their ruin, as apt guides to
hurry princes and potentates blindfold to the edge of the precipice, and
leave them to destruction, exhorts the Aristocracy of England, in an
intercalary Quarterly Review, to act as the old King of France did, and
as the new King of France intends to do—to be firm.8 Those who would
never yield to aught but fear, are tauntingly exhorted not to yield to
that. Obstinate cleaving to the taxes, unflinching adherence to the
interest of their pockets, constitutes Roman virtue in Edition: current;
Page: [276] the eyes of some people. But if the Aristocracy of England
are sufficiently unaware of their present situation to hearken to such
counsellors, they little know what is in store for them. If the English
and the new French government are destined severally to give another
lesson to the world on the incapacity of oligarchies, howsoever
constituted, to learn wisdom from experience, the trial must be
submitted to: but at least those who shall provoke it shall do so
knowingly, and must hold themselves prepared to suffer the natural
consequences of their own folly.


90.: THE PARLIAMENTARY REFORM BILL
 EXAMINER, 6 MAR., 1831, P. 147

One of Mill’s few direct contemporary comments on the British reform
agitation of 1830-32, this article appeared in the “Political Examiner”
under the heading “[From a Correspondent].” It is described in his
bibliography as “Paragraphs on the Parliamentary Reform Bill headed
‘from a Correspondent’ in the Examiner of 6th March 1831” (MacMinn, p.
15); in the Somerville College set it is listed as “Article on the
Reform Bill” and enclosed in square brackets, with one inked correction,
“had had” to “had led to”

(277.23).

in estimating the nature of the change which Lord John Russell’s Bill,1
if adopted, will produce in the practical working of the Constitution,
it is necessary to look somewhat closely at the specific character of
the abuses by which our government has hitherto been deformed.

These are of two kinds: 1st, private jobs, for the benefit of
individuals possessing Parliamentary influence.—2dly, bad laws, and
great naval and military establishments, for the benefit of the higher
classes generally.

We expect that the proposed Reform will almost entirely extinguish
private jobs. The supporters whom the Minister secures by the direct
expenditure of the public money are seldom those who are returned by
numerous constituencies. It is worth while, for a minister to purchase a
vote in parliament by giving a place to the son or younger brother of a
borough patron; it is seldom worth while for the sake of two votes, to
give valuable consideration to each man of the majority of the
influential landholders of a county. Westmoreland is an exception; but
Westmoreland is, in reality, a close borough.2 County members are seldom
the Edition: current; Page: [277] paid and regular supporters of an
administration; they seldom receive any thing out of the taxes, and are
therefore generally friends to retrenchment; but they are, more than any
other class of the members of Parliament, the stedfast and unbending
supporters of bad laws. For bad laws do not exist for the benefit of
borough proprietors, but of the landed, or the landed and monied classes
at large. The same may be said of large military and naval
establishments, the chief cause of the magnitude of the public burthens.

The proposed Reform will take the nomination of a majority in Parliament
from two hundred aristocratical families, and will give it to the
Aristocracy generally; for, without the protection of the Ballot, it is
absurd to suppose that the nominal electors, except in a few places like
Westminster, will be less subject to undue influence than at the present
moment.3 Instead of our own old oligarchy, we shall have a French
oligarchy: the undue power, instead of being unequally divided,—a large
mass being held by one very great man, and small portions by a number of
small men, will now be more equally divided among the higher classes at
large; but subject to no greater responsibility than at present; with
the same sinister interests, and under a more specious appearance.

Heretofore a Minister, hard pressed by public opinion, could carry with
him a large portion of the borough members, who, to save their place,
would at times separate themselves from their order. Hereafter an
immense majority of the House will be the mere men of their order, or
would be so, were they not controlled by the irresistible spirit of the
age.

If the proposed Reform had been introduced in quiet times, and had led
to no ulterior changes, we question whether the alteration which it
would have made in the composition of the Houses would have been in any
respect an improvement. But with an excited public, and a public fully
possessed with the importance of the Ballot, the members whom this
measure will send to Parliament must represent, in a considerable
degree, the real feelings of their nominal constituents, or the cry for
the Ballot will become absolutely irresistible. If we gain this Bill,
therefore, we shall gain all; and every nerve ought to be strained by
every Reformer throughout the nation, for the success of the ministerial
measure.

If there were no other reason for giving it the most strenuous support,
the consternation which it has spread among the whole tribe of the
people’s enemies would be a sufficient one.

Edition: current; Page: [278]


91.: FRENCH NEWS [18]
 EXAMINER, 6 MAR., 1831, P. 155

For the entry in Mill’s bibliography, see No. 55. The unheaded item is
listed as “Article on France” and these two paragraphs are enclosed in
square brackets in the Somerville College set.

the french chamber of deputies has lowered the qualification of an
elector from 300 to 200 francs of direct taxes;1 which will give a
constituency of about 200,000, or rather more than double the present
number. The Chamber, however, has refused to give votes to advocates,
physicians, attorneys, notaries, or judges, unless qualified by paying
the same amount of taxes as other people.

The Centres, who were eager for a dissolution when they thought that it
could take place under the pre-existing election law, have now resumed
their previous attitude of hostility to it. No one can guess whether the
declared intention of the Government to dissolve the Chamber will even
now be persevered in; so timid and rash (no uncommon conjunction) is the
King, and so truckling his Ministry. The destinies of France are in the
hands of men more than nine-tenths of whom are not fit to have any part
in the government of a parish.


92.: THE SPIRIT OF THE AGE, III [Part 2]
 EXAMINER, 13 MAR., 1831, PP. 162-3

This article, headed “The Spirit of the Age, / No. 3, concluded,” is
introduced by the following notice: “[It was by mistake that we
announced, several weeks since, that this series would conclude with the
present paper. It will extend to several numbers more, though the
pressure of more urgent matter will not enable us to continue it from
week to week.]” The notice presumably refers to the remark at the end of
No. 82, “The conclusion of this Paper in our next.” For the entry in
Mill’s bibliography, see No. 73. In the Somerville College set, it is
listed as heading and enclosed in square brackets.

it is not necessary for me to point out that until a comparatively
recent period, none but the wealthy, and even, I might say, the
hereditarily wealthy, had it in their power to acquire the intelligence,
the knowledge, and the habits, which are necessary to qualify a man, in
any tolerable degree, for managing the affairs of his country. It is not
necessary for me to show that this is no longer the case, nor what are
the circumstances which have changed it: the improvement in the arts of
life, giving ease and comfort to great numbers not possessed of the
degree of wealth which confers political power: the increase of reading:
the diffusion of Edition: current; Page: [279] elementary education: the
increase of the town-population, which brings masses of men together,
and accustoms them to examine and discuss important subjects with one
another; and various other causes, which are known to every body. All
this, however, is nothing more than the acquisition by other people in
an inferior degree, of a few of the advantages which have always been
within the reach of the higher classes, in a much greater degree: and if
the higher classes had profited as they might have done by these
advantages, and had kept their station in the vanguard of the march of
improvement, they would not only at this moment have been sure to retain
in their hands all the powers of government, subject perhaps to severer
conditions of responsibility, but might possibly even have continued for
a considerable time longer to retain them on the same footing as at
present. For ample experience has proved that mankind (who, however
prone they may be, in periods of transition, to even groundless
suspicion and distrust, are as strongly addicted at all other times to
the opposite extreme of blind and boundless confidence), will bear even
great excesses of abused power, from those whom they recognize as fitter
to hold the reins of government than themselves.

But the higher classes, instead of advancing, have retrograded in all
the higher qualities of mind. In the humanizing effects of civilization
they have indeed partaken, and, to some extent, in the diffusion of
superficial knowledge, and are so far superior to their predecessors:
but those predecessors were braced and nerved by the invigorating
atmosphere of a barbarous age, and had all the virtues of a strong will
and an energetic active mind, which their descendants are destitute of.
For these qualities were not the fruits of an enlightened education
skilfully pointed to that end, but of the peculiar position of the
holders of power; and that position is no longer the same.

All is not absolutely unfounded in the notion we imbibe at school, from
the modern writers on the decline of the ancient commonwealths, that
luxury deadens and enervates the mind. It is true that these writers
(whose opinion, truly, was the result of no process of thought in their
own imitative souls, but a faint impression left by a ray of the stoic
philosophy of Greece and Rome themselves, refracted or bent out of its
direction by the muddy medium through which it had passed) were wrong in
laying it down as a principle that pleasure enervates; as if pleasure,
only to be earned by labour and won by heroic deeds, ever did or ever
could enervate the mind of any one. What really enervates, is the secure
and unquestioned possession, without any exertion, of all those things,
to gain which, mankind in general are wont to exert themselves. This
secure and lazy possession, the higher classes have now for some
generations enjoyed; their predecessors in the same station and
privileges did not enjoy it.

Who, for example, that looks over the catalogue of the Kings who have
reigned in Europe for the last two centuries, would not conclude, from
that and the nature of the case combined, that the station of a
hereditary king was the very Edition: current; Page: [280] most
unfavourable to be found in this sublunary world, for the acquisition of
any talents for governing? Is not the incapacity of the monarch allowed
for, as an inevitable inconvenience, even by the most strenuous
supporters of monarchy; represented at best as an evil susceptible of
palliation, and preventing other evils far more fatal? From the
beginning of the eighteenth century it has passed into a philosophic
truism, that kings are generally unfit to govern, and likely even to
delegate their power not to statesmen, but to favourites, unless forced
to choose those Ministers whom the public voice recommends to them. Yet
this maxim is far from being borne out by history. A decided majority of
all the kings of England previous to the Revolution, will be found to
have been men who, in every endowment belonging to their age, might be
compared to the best men in it. The same may be said of the Emperors of
Germany, and even of the Kings of France, of Spain, the Dukes of
Burgundy, and so on. Would you know why? Think of Edward II and Richard
II.1 In that turbulent age, no rank or station rendered the situation of
a man without considerable personal endowments, a secure one. If the
king possessed eminent talents, he might be nearly absolute: if he was a
slave to ease and dissipation, not only his importance was absolutely
null, but his throne and his life itself were constantly in danger. The
Barons stood no less in need of mental energy and ability. Power, though
not earned by capacity, might be greatly increased by it, and could not
be retained or enjoyed without it. The possessor of power was not in the
situation of one who is rewarded without exertion, but of one who feels
a great prize within his grasp, and is stimulated to every effort
necessary to make it securely his own.

But the virtues which insecurity calls forth, ceased with insecurity
itself. In a civilized age, though it may be difficult to get, it is
very easy to keep: if a man does not earn what he gets before he gets
it, he has little motive to earn it thereafter. The greater the power a
man has upon these terms, the less he is likely to deserve it.
Accordingly, as Mr. Hallam has remarked, Great Britain has had since
William III no monarch of more than ordinary personal endowments;2 nor
will she ever more, unless the chapter of accidents should open at a
page inscribed with very singular characters. We may add, that the House
of Peers has produced, since the same epoch, hardly any remarkable men;
though some such have, from time to time, been aggregated to the order.
As soon as these facts became manifest, it was easy to see a termination
to hereditary monarchy and hereditary aristocracy: for we never shall
again return to the age of violence and insecurity, when men were
forced, whatever might be their taste for incapacity, to become men of
talents in spite of themselves: and mankind will not always Edition:
current; Page: [281] consent to allow a fat elderly gentleman3 to fill
the first place, without insisting upon his doing something to deserve
it. I do not undertake to say in what particular year hereditary
distinctions will be abolished, nor do I say that I would vote for their
abolition, if it were proposed now, in the existing state of society and
opinion: but to the philosopher, who contemplates the past and future
fortunes of mankind as one series, and who counts a generation or two
for no more in marking the changes of the moral, than an age or two in
those of the physical world, the ultimate fate of such distinctions is
already decided.

There was an intermediate stage in the history of our own island, in
which it was yet a question whether the Crown should share in the
government of the country as the master of the aristocracy, or only as
the first and most powerful of its members. Though the progress of
civilization had given to the gentry of England, personal security
independently of honourable exertion, it had not yet given them
undisputed power. They were nothing, except through the Parliament, and
the Parliament as yet, was nothing, except through their energy and
talents. The great names by which the seventeenth century of English
history has been immortalized, belonged almost without an exception to
the same class which now possesses the governing power. What a contrast!
Think, good heavens! that Sir John Elliot, and John Hampden, and Sir
John Colepepper, and Sir Thomas Wentworth, were country gentlemen—and
think who are the parliamentary leaders of that class in our own day: a
Knatchbull, a Bankes, a Gooch, a Lethbridge!4 Think even of the most
respectable names among the English landholders of our time, such as
Lord Wharncliffe, or Mr. Coke.5 The Edition: current; Page: [282]
remainder of the great politicians of that age, the Bacons, the Cecils,
the Walsinghams, the Seldens, the Iretons, the Pyms, the Cokes, were
mostly lawyers.6 But what lawyers, and how strikingly distinguished, as
well by their origin as by the range of their faculties and
acquirements, from our successful Barristers, our Sugdens and Copleys!7
They were almost to a man, the younger or even the elder sons of the
first families among the English gentry: who studied the law as being
what it then in some degree was, a liberal profession, a pursuit fit for
a gentleman, and not for a mere drudge; exercising at least the higher
faculties, by the comprehension of principles, (though frequently absurd
ones), not the mere memory, by the heaping together of unconnected
details: and who studied it chiefly that it might serve them in
fulfilling the exalted mission, to which they were called by an ambition
justly to be called noble, since it required of them great sacrifices,
and could be gratified only by the accomplishment of what was then
nearest to their country’s weal.

Applied to these men, the expression, natural leaders of the people, has
some meaning: and then and then only it was that our institutions worked
well, for they made this country the nurse of more that is exalted in
sentiment, and expansive and profound in thought, than has been produced
by all other countries in the modern world taken together, until a
recent period. The whole of their effect is now the direct contrary—to
degrade our morals, and to narrow and blunt our understandings: nor
shall we ever be what we might be, nor even what we once were, until our
institutions are adapted to the present state of civilization, and made
compatible with the future progress of the human mind. But this will, I
trust, more clearly appear, when, in the next paper, the historical
survey which I have here taken of the conditions of worldly power, shall
also have been taken of the conditions of moral influence.

A.B.

Edition: current; Page: [283]


93.: FRENCH NEWS [19]
 EXAMINER, 13 MAR., 1831, P. 171

This article is headed “London, March 13.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55. In the Somerville College set the item is
listed as “Article on France” and the first five paragraphs are enclosed
in square brackets (the final three paragraphs concern German and Polish
affairs and their effect in Paris).

the french chamber of deputies has adopted the article of the proposed
election-law, which lowers the qualification of a deputy from 1000 to
500 francs of direct taxes.1

With this improvement in the conditions of eligibility, and the
reduction which has already been voted in the elective franchise, there
is room to hope for some improvement in the composition of the Chamber,
when the new law shall come into operation. It is, therefore, of the
greatest importance that the existing Chamber should be promptly
dissolved. But doubts are thrown out as to the King’s disposition to
adhere to the intentions which his Ministers have expressed on this
subject. It is surmised that the present Ministry will be turned out,
and another appointed from the ranks of the centre; and that a
prorogation, instead of a dissolution, will take place. It is certain
that M. Mérilhou has been obliged to resign, because he refused to
dismiss M. Comte, Procureur du Roi, one of the wisest and most virtuous
men in France.2

There would be something ludicrous, were it not a subject for the
deepest melancholy, in the panic terrors and woful plight of the
individual whom the Revolution of July has hoisted up to an eminence
which he is utterly incapable of creditably filling. He is now suffering
under the embarrassments which his own folly, and that alone, has
brought upon him; he is feeling the consequences of first raising the
hopes of an excitable and confiding people, and then utterly
disappointing them.

We know nothing better fitted to convince the French of the ignorance
and baseness of the English newspaper writers, than the tone they have
assumed with respect to the present party differences in France. Men who
are shouting in favour of a plan of Parliamentary Reform, far outrunning
anything which the most ardent of the French Reformers have even
ventured to suggest, for immediate adoption,—a plan which adds 500,000
at one blow,3 to a constituent Edition: current; Page: [284] body
already very numerous, when the question in France is, whether, in a
much larger population, a few more or a few less than 200,000 in all,
shall be admitted to the elective franchise—these very writers treat as
the wildest of democrats men who do not go a quarter of their length in
democracy, on the mere word of those who are the avowed enemies of all
Reform whatever!

The probabilities of war seem, in the general apprehension, to have
increased: in ours they are diminishing. The French may be assured, that
the English people will approve of their enforcing the principle of
non-intervention against the despotic powers, but will disapprove of
their violating that principle, in order to crusade in support of the
subjects of other states against their governments, however just the
resistance of such subjects may be, or however certain their
destruction, if not aided from abroad. The French have their character
for moderation and pacific inclinations still to acquire; and should
they go to war on grounds in any respect doubtful, those grounds are
sure to be interpreted to their disadvantage.4


94.: HERSCHEL’S PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE
 EXAMINER, 20 MAR., 1831, PP. 179-80

John Frederick William Herschel, 1st Baronet (1792-1871), astronomer,
son of the astronomer Sir William Herschel and President of the
Astronomical Society 1827-32, was a brilliant theorist as well as
observer and discoverer of stars. This review appears in the “Literary
Examiner,” headed: “Lardner’s Cabinet Cyclopaedia, Vol. XIV. A
Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy. By John
Frederick William Herschel, Esq. A.M., late Fellow of St. John’s
College, Cambridge, &c. &c. &c.” The work had been published in London
by Longman, et al., in late 1830. Described in Mill’s bibliography as
“Review of Herschel’s Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy, in
the Examiner of 20th March 1831” (MacMinn, p. 15), the item is similarly
listed (“Review of Herschel’s Discourse on the Study of Natural
Philosophy”), and enclosed in square brackets, in the Somerville College
set.

this work has afforded us great pleasure, and greater hope. It evinces a
reach of thought, for which the physical researches of the present day
are quite inapt to supply adequate occupation. A greater destiny is
reserved for Mr. Herschel. It is his to aspire, and not in vain, to the
character of the philosopher—to whom the mere man of science is but a
pioneer.

If the utility of the very modern physical inquiries were to be
estimated solely by the intrinsic value of their results, by the direct
use which has been made, or from their nature ever can be made, of the
truths which those inquiries have elicited, we know not that the labours
of a savant would be deserving of much higher commendation than those of
a bricklayer; and we much doubt whether, if Edition: current; Page:
[285] there had not been made a single scientific discovery in the last
hundred years, mankind, taken in the mass, would have at this moment
enjoyed one jot less of happiness than they actually do. Mere physical
comforts and enjoyments, not the most valuable part of happiness, are
the best which such knowledge could bestow, while it is too apparent in
how niggardly a measure it has dealt out even those, to an immense
numerical majority in the most civilized nations; and even the fortunate
individuals on whom it has most lavished its gifts, have most frequently
found in them not enjoyment, but only means of enjoyment, from which
they have never known how to extract real happiness—nor ever will, until
their minds are as highly cultivated as their bodies are: until moral
and social science have attained the same perfection as physical
science: until the theory and practice of education are lifted out of
their present depressed and degraded posture: until human beings have
learned how to cultivate and nurture their own susceptibilities of
happiness, and have made such arrangements of outward circumstances, as
shall provide that the means which each adopts of seeking his own
well-being, shall no longer damage that of the remainder of his species.

To this blessed consummation, physical science is capable of
contributing invaluable assistance; not, however, by the truths which it
discloses, but by the process by which it attains to them. It is an
example, and the only example, of a vast body of connected truth,
gradually elicited by patient and earnest investigation, and finally
recognized and submitted to by a convinced and subdued world. If the
broad and fundamental differences which exist among the minds which have
sought with greatest diligence for truths of a higher order, may be
traced, as they clearly may, to differences in their methods, or modes
of philosophising; if the uncertainty which hangs over the very elements
of moral and social philosophy, proves that the means of arriving at the
truth in those sciences are not yet properly understood—that the minds
of the majority of inquirers are not yet so formed as to be capable of
the successful pursuit of those truths which are essential to the proper
use and application of all other knowledge; whither can mankind so
advantageously turn, in order to learn the proper means, and to form
their minds to the proper habits, as to that branch of knowledge in
which, by universal acknowledgment, the greatest number of truths have
been ascertained, and the greatest possible degree of certainty has been
arrived at?

But physical science has not yet been converted to this its noblest use.
Men of science are usually as little conscious of the methods by which
they have made their greatest discoveries, as the clown is of the
structure of his eye, or the process by which he has learnt to see. With
the exception of the analysis of the syllogism, which was performed long
ago by the ancients, scarcely any thing has yet been contributed towards
an accurate dissection of the mode in which the human understanding
arrives at the discovery and the verification of truth. Bacon afforded
merely a few hints, which it has scarcely even yet been attempted to
Edition: current; Page: [286] improve and follow up: for such scattered
suggestions as can be gleaned from books of later date, mankind are
indebted to metaphysical writers, not to physical; to Locke and Brown,1
rather than to Newton or Davy.2 Men of science have even, in our own
country at least, rather more than their share of the vulgar prejudice
against such researches. An inquiry into the nature of the instrument
with which they all work, the human mind, and into the mode of bringing
that instrument to the greatest perfection, and using it to the greatest
advantage, has usually been treated by them as something frivolous and
idle: as if the rules of philosophising did not stand fully as much in
need of a philosophical foundation, as any of the particular truths
which have been, or may be, attained by the observance of them.

From this prejudice, which essentially belongs to minds of the most
limited range (though, perhaps, of microscopic vision within that range)
Mr. Herschel is wholly exempt; and his work contains (we speak
advisedly) a clearer and less incomplete view of the nature of
philosophical truth, of the evidence on which it rests, and the means of
discovering and testing it, than is to be found in any work which has
yet been produced. To point out in what particulars it appears to us to
fall short of what is still to be looked for and hoped for, would be
inappropriate to the nature of a notice like the present: but there is
nothing which may not be hoped for from the author of such a work, if he
perseveres in the course of thinking into which he has here entered; and
his vast and profound knowledge in every department of physics has
enabled him, in this volume, to supply any one who may take up the
inquiry where he has left it, with a rich fund of the most apt examples,
capable alike of illustrating, and of suggesting, the most profound and
important views on the operation of the intellect in philosophising.

The first chapter, being the most vague, is, as usually happens in such
cases, the least valuable. There are some points in the higher
metaphysics on which we should differ from the author: but these are
precisely such as have least to do with the general course of his
speculations. The spirit of the work is admirable. We never met with a
book so calculated to inspire a high conception of the superiority of
science over empiricism under the name of common sense—of the advantage
of systematic investigation, and high general cultivation of the
intellect. And we quote with delight the following noble passage;
showing that one who, by the consent of all our scientific men, is
placed first, or among the first, in the knowledge of all which physical
science can teach, yet feels that there are truths far more important to
human happiness than all these which it is Edition: current; Page: [287]
the highest boast of physical science that it may assist in training the
mind to be capable of investigating and applying. The first part of the
treatise, which is devoted to setting forth the “General Nature and
Advantages of the Study of the Physical Sciences,” is wound up as
follows:

Finally, the improvement effected in the condition of mankind, by
advances in physical science as applied to the useful purposes of life,
is very far from being limited to their direct consequences in the more
abundant supply of our physical wants, and the increase of our comforts.
Great as these benefits are, they are yet but steps to others of a still
higher kind. The successful results of our experiments and reasonings in
natural philosophy, and the incalculable advantages which experience,
systematically consulted and dispassionately reasoned on, has conferred
in matters purely physical, tend of necessity to impress something of
the well weighed and progressive character of science on the more
complicated conduct of our social and moral relations. It is thus that
legislation and politics become gradually regarded as experimental
sciences; and history, not as formerly, the mere record of tyrannies and
slaughters, which, by immortalizing the execrable actions of one age,
perpetuates the ambition of committing them in every succeeding one, but
as the archive of experiments, successful and unsuccessful, gradually
accumulating towards the solution of the grand problem—how the
advantages of government are to be secured with the least possible
inconvenience to the governed. The celebrated apophthegm, that nations
never profit by experience, becomes yearly more and more untrue.
Political economy, at least, is found to have sound principles, founded
in the moral and physical nature of man, which, however lost sight of in
particular measures—however even temporarily controverted and borne down
by clamour, have yet a stronger and stronger testimony borne to them in
each succeeding generation, by which they must sooner or later prevail.
The idea once conceived and verified, that great and noble ends are to
be achieved, by which the condition of the whole human species shall be
permanently bettered, by bringing into exercise a sufficient quantity of
sober thought, and by a proper adaptation of means, is of itself
sufficient to set us earnestly on reflecting what ends are truly great
and noble, either in themselves, or as conducive to others of a still
loftier character; because we are not now, as heretofore, hopeless of
attaining them. It is not now equally harmless and insignificant whether
we are right or wrong, since we are no longer supinely and helplessly
carried down the stream of events, but feel ourselves capable of
buffetting at least with its waves, and perhaps of riding triumphantly
over them; for why should we despair that the reason which has enabled
us to subdue all nature to our purposes, should (if permitted and
assisted by the providence of God,) achieve a far more difficult
conquest; and ultimately find some means of enabling the collective
wisdom of mankind to bear down those obstacles which individual
short-sightedness, selfishness, and passion, oppose to all improvements,
and by which the highest hopes are continually blighted, and the fairest
prospects marred.

(Pp. 72-4.)


95.: FRENCH NEWS [20]
 EXAMINER, 20 MAR., 1831, P. 186

This item is headed “London, March 20.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55. The piece is identified as “Article on France”
and these two paragraphs are enclosed in square brackets in the
Somerville College set.

Edition: current; Page: [288]
a change has taken place in the French ministry. Laffitte has resigned;
Mérilhou was out of office already; the others, who composed the dregs
of the late Cabinet, remain in office, though with some shuffling and
changing of places, under the new Premier, M. Casimir-Périer, who takes
the department of the interior. Louis, the most narrow-minded and inept
of Bonaparte’s clerks, resumes the post of minister of finance, which he
held in the administration of Guizot, and in two of the numerous
ministries of Louis XVIII.1 His nephew, Admiral De Rigny, who commanded
the French fleet at Navarino, becomes minister of marine.2

From the letter of our Paris correspondent,3 it will be seen what the
popular party think of this ministry; they conceive, and do not
hesitate, through their various organs, to declare, that it is the
Polignac ministry of the new government, and will bring that government
to the same abrupt termination as that which preceded it. We trust not;
for as it is the second blow which makes the quarrel, so it is the
second convulsion which annihilates future stability. But if there be
such a convulsion, we are as fully convinced that the incredible folly
and weakness of Louis Philippe, and the grasping selfishness of his
worthy majority, are the sole cause of it, as we are that the wisdom of
our public will lay the whole blame upon those who are contending for a
Parliamentary Reform about half as extensive as that which an English
King,4 and a cabinet of English Noblemen, have thought it safe and
necessary to propose to an English Parliament, amidst the acclamations
of the people from the Orkneys to the Land’s End.


96.: FRENCH NEWS [21]
 EXAMINER, 27 MAR., 1831, PP. 202-3

This item is headed “London, March 27.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55. Exceptionally, Mill here comments also on
Italian news, as he indicates in the listing in the Somerville College
set, “Article on France and Italy”; Mill gives the page number as 201,
rather than 202-3, but the paragraphs here included are enclosed in
Mill’s square brackets.

it appears that the change of ministry in France has made no alteration
in the intention of dissolving the Chamber.

Edition: current; Page: [289]
The most recent news from Italy1 seems to imply that the Austrian
Government has no purpose of interfering with the new order of things
any where in Italy, except the duchies of Parma and Modena—grounding
their pretended right of interference upon the circumstance, that these
duchies are held, the one by an Austrian princess, the other by an
Austrian prince,2 and revert, on failure of direct heirs, to the
reigning line. If this be the limit of the interference—though the
violation of justice, and the rights of every independent people to
change their government, is the same on the smaller scale as on the
larger one, the emancipation of Italy will be no way retarded by this
act of usurpation. All that is important is, that there should be a
state in Italy, governing itself, and sheltering the exiled patriots of
the other states. Round that nucleus the whole of Italy will in time
cluster itself. That three or four towns more or less should be included
this year or the next, in the independent Italian state, is of little
account, when every one sees that all Italy will join it on the first
opportunity, and that, in the mean time, Italian patriotism and Italian
intellect will find in Italy itself a place, not only of refuge, but of
healthy nourishment and growth.


97.: THE SPIRIT OF THE AGE, IV
 EXAMINER, 3 APR., 1831, PP. 210-11

For the context and entry in Mill’s bibliography, see No. 73. The
article is listed as “The Spirit of the Age, No. 4” and enclosed in
square brackets in the Somerville College set.

it has been stated, in the preceding paper,1 that the conditions which
confer worldly power are still, amidst all changes of circumstances, the
same as in the middle ages—namely, the possession of wealth, or the
being employed and trusted by the wealthy. In the middle ages, this form
of government might have been approved, even by a philosopher, if a
philosopher had been possible in those ages: not, surely, for its
intrinsic excellence; not because mankind enjoyed, or could have
enjoyed, the blessings of good government under it: but there are states
of society in which we must not seek for a good government, but for the
least bad one. It is part of the inevitable lot of mankind, that when
they themselves are in a backward state of civilization, they are
unsusceptible of being well governed.

Edition: current; Page: [290]
But, now, mankind are capable of being better governed than the wealthy
classes have ever heretofore governed them: while those classes, instead
of having improved, have actually retrograded in capacity for
government. The abuses of their power have not diminished, though now
showing themselves no otherwise than in forms compatible with the
mildness of modern manners, and being of that kind which provokes
contempt, mingled with resentment, rather than terror and hatred, as of
yore.

Such of the above propositions as required illustration appearing to
have sufficiently received it in the foregoing paper, I proceed to take
a similar survey of the changes which mankind have undergone in respect
to the conditions on which moral influence, or power over the minds of
mankind, is dependent.

There are three distinguishable sources of moral influence:—eminent
wisdom and virtue, real or supposed; the power of addressing mankind in
the name of religion; and, finally, worldly power.

It is not necessary to illustrate the manner in which superiority of
wisdom and virtue, or in which religion, pre-engages men’s minds with
the opinions and feelings in favour of which those authorities declare
themselves. It is equally superfluous to insist upon the influence
exercised over the minds of men by worldly power. The tendency of the
human mind to the worship of power, is well understood. It is matter of
common complaint, that even the Supreme Being is adored by an immense
majority as the Almighty, not as the All-good; as he who can destroy,
not as he who has blessed. It is a familiar fact, that the vulgar, in
all parts of the world, have in general little or no rule of conduct or
of opinion, but to do as their betters do, and to think as their betters
think: and this very word betters, is a speaking proof of the fact which
we allege—meaning, as it does, not their wisers, or their honesters, but
their richers, and those placed in authority over them.

All persons, from the most ignorant to the most instructed, from the
most stupid to the most intelligent, have their minds more or less under
the dominion of one or other, or all, of the influences which have just
been mentioned. All bow down, with a submission more or less implicit,
to the authority of superior minds, or of the interpreters of the divine
will, or of their superiors in rank and station.

When an opinion is sanctioned by all these authorities, or by any one of
them, the others not opposing, it becomes the received opinion. At all
periods of history in which there has existed a general agreement among
these three authorities, there have existed received doctrines: a phrase
the sense of which is now almost forgotten. The most marked character of
such periods is a firm confidence in inherited opinions. Men cleave with
a strong and fervent faith to the doctrine which they have imbibed from
their infancy: though in conduct they be tempted to swerve from it, the
belief remains in their hearts, fixed and immoveable, and has an
irresistible hold upon the consciences of all good men. Edition:
current; Page: [291] When, on the contrary, the three authorities are
divided among themselves, or against each other, a violent conflict
rages among opposing doctrines, until one or other prevails, or until
mankind settle down into a state of general uncertainty and scepticism.
At present, we are in a mixed state; some fight fiercely under their
several banners, and these chiefly the least instructed; while the
others (those few excepted who have strength to stand by themselves) are
blown about by every breath, having no steady opinion—or at least no
deep-rooted conviction that their opinion is true.

Society, therefore, has its natural state, and its transitional state,
with respect to moral influence as well as to worldly power. Let us
bestow a few words upon the natural state, and upon the nature of those
varieties of the social order in which it has hitherto been realized.

It is in states of society in which the holders of power are chosen by
the people (or by the most highly civilized portion of the people) for
their supposed fitness, that we should most expect to find the three
authorities acting together, and giving their sanction to the same
doctrines. As men are raised to worldly power for their supposed wisdom
and virtue, two of the three sources of moral influence are united in
the same individuals. And although the rulers of such societies, being
the creatures of the people’s choice, have not, quâ rulers, that
ascendancy over the minds of the people, which power obtained and held
independently of their will, commonly possesses; nevertheless, the
station to which they are elevated gives them greater opportunities of
rendering their wisdom and their virtue visible, while it also fixed the
outward stamp of general recognition upon that merit, which would
otherwise operate upon each mind only in proportion to its confidence in
its own power of discriminating the most worthy.

Accordingly, in the best-constituted commonwealths of the ancient world,
this unity of moral influence did to a very great degree exist. And in
the great popular government of our own times, it exists with respect to
the general doctrines of the constitution, and many maxims of national
policy, and the list of received doctrines is increasing as rapidly as
the differences of opinion among the persons possessing moral influence
will allow.

I say, only the best-constituted commonwealths of antiquity—and chiefly
Athens, Sparta, and Rome—because, in the others, the form of the
government, and the circumstances of society itself, being in a
perpetual flux, the elements of moral influence never remained long
enough in the same hands, to allow time for constitutional doctrines, or
received maxims of policy, to grow up. But, in the three commonwealths
which I have named, such constitutional doctrines, and such received
maxims of policy, did exist, and the community was intensely attached to
them.

The great authority for political doctrines in all these governments was
the wisdom of ancestors: their old laws, their old maxims, the opinions
of their ancient statesmen. This may sound strange to those who have
imbibed the silly Edition: current; Page: [292] persuasion, that
fickleness and love of innovation are the characteristics of popular
governments. It is, however, matter of authentic history. It is not seen
in reading Mitford, who always believed his prejudices above his
eyes2—but it is seen in reading Demosthenes, who shows in every page
that he regards the authority of ancestors, not merely as an argument,
but as one of the strongest of arguments; and steps out of his way to
eulogise the wisdom of the ancient laws and lawgivers, with a frequency
which proves it to have been the most popular of topics, and one on
which his unequalled tact and sagacity taught him mainly to rely. All
the other Athenian orators, down to the speeches in Thucydides; Cicero,
and all that we know of the Roman orators; Plato, and almost all the
monuments which remain to us of the ideas of Athens, Sparta, and Rome,
teem with evidence of the same fact.3 In all this there is nothing but
what the known constitution of human nature would have enabled us to
surmise: it is precisely what marks these commonwealths to have been in
a natural state of society. When a government, whether it be a popular
one or not, works well for the people among whom it exists, and
satisfies their highest conceptions of a good social order, there is
naturally a strong, and generally a very just, reverence for the memory
of its founders. This would not have been thought strange three-quarters
of a century ago. Robertson, the historian, speaks with the utmost
simplicity, of “that attachment to ancient forms, and aversion to
innovation, which are the unfailing characteristics of popular
assemblies.”4 Europe had not then entered into the state of transition
of which the first overt manifestation was the breaking out of the
French revolution. Since that epoch, those near-sighted people who can
see nothing beyond their own age, have mistaken that desire of novelty,
and disregard of the authority of ancestors, which characterise an age
of transition, for the properties of a popular government: just as if
the same symptoms did not constantly attend every change, no matter of
what nature, in Edition: current; Page: [293] the spirit of the age; as
if we might not be quite sure that there was as much scoffing at the
wisdom of ancestors in the Court of Augustus,5 as in the National
Convention of France.

The authority of ancestors, so deeply reverenced at Athens and Rome, was
the authority of the wisest and best men for many successive
generations. If, instead of upholding and applauding the ancient maxims,
the ablest and most experienced contemporaries had affirmed them to be
the rude conceptions of barbarians, the many would have lost their faith
in them, and would have been as we are now. Nor had authority more than
its just weight: it did not supersede reason, but guided it: for every
relic which remains to us, of what was addressed to the Athenian Demos,
for example, by their orators and politicians, is full of strong sense,
cogent argument, and the most manly and forcible appeals to the reason
of the people. The speeches of the great orators, and those in
Thucydides, are monuments of long-sighted policy, and keen and sagacious
observation of life and human nature, which will be prized as long as
the world shall endure, or as wisdom shall be understood and appreciated
in it.

It is well known that respect and deference for old age formed a
conspicuous feature both in the public and private morality of the
ancient commonwealths: and there is no surer mark of a natural state of
society in respect to moral influence. So deeply, however, have the
notions and feelings of an age of transition taken root among us, that
if there are some who wonder that this reverence should no longer exist,
there are probably many more who wonder that it should ever have
existed, and view it as a sort of superstition, or as one of the
numerous oddities of those peculiar people, the ancients: if, indeed,
they believe it at all; for it may be almost a misapplication of terms
to say that a man believes a fact, although he may never dream of
doubting it; as religious writers know well, when they treat of what
they call practical infidelity. We can hardly be said to believe that,
which we do not conceive with any distinctness or vivacity. What we read
of Greece and Rome is so remote from what we have ever seen; we are
helped by so few familiar analogies to penetrate our minds with its
spirit, and make ourselves, as it were, at home in it, that some
strength of imagination is requisite to conceive it with the intensity
and life which is essential to any thing deserving the name of belief.
We do not believe ancient history, we only fancy we believe it—our
belief deserves no higher name than simple acquiescence—it scarcely
amounts to more than that conventional assent, which we give to the
mythology of the same nations.

Unquestionably, if the mental state of the old men of the present day
were their natural state, there would be little reason for paying much
deference to their modes of thinking. But narrowness of mind, and
obstinate prejudice, are not the necessary, or the natural concomitants
of old age. Old men have generally both Edition: current; Page: [294]
their opinions and their feelings more deeply rooted than the young; but
is it an evil to have strong convictions, and steady unfluctuating
feelings? It is on the contrary, essential to all dignity or solidity of
character, and to all fitness for guiding or governing mankind. It
constitutes prejudice, only when society is at one of those turns or
vicissitudes in its history, at which it becomes necessary that it
should change its opinions and its feelings. There is but little wisdom
in any one head, whatever quantity there may be in the society
collectively, when the young are wiser than the old. We should not
forget that, in the natural state of things, the old would, as a matter
of course, be further advanced than the young, simply because they have
been longer on the road. If this be not the case at present, it is
because we have come to a bend in the road, and they not knowing it,
continued to advance in the same line, got to the wrong side of the
hedge, and allowed even the hindmost to pass them by. If the old know
less than the young, it is because it is hard to unlearn; but society,
fortunately, has not so frequent need to unlearn, as to learn.

All old men might have, and some old men really have, knowledge which it
is altogether impossible that a young man, however great his capacity,
should possess a very large measure of, namely, that which is derived
from personal experience. There are some states of civilization in which
this is every thing—rude states, it is true. In these, accordingly, the
authority of age is almost unlimited. Nowhere is it so great as among
the North American Indians: for there, the knowledge and judgment of
every man must be nearly in proportion to the length of his individual
experience, as the cunning of a fox may be not inaccurately measured by
his years. Among the Greeks and Romans, though, in comparison, highly
civilized nations, wisdom, notwithstanding, was less the fruit of
speculative study, than of intercourse with the world, practice in
business, and the long habit of deliberating on public affairs. It was
there a recognised maxim, that old men were fittest to devise, and young
men to execute.

In an age of literature, there is no longer, of necessity, the same wide
interval between the knowledge of the old, and that which is attainable
by the young. The experience of all former ages, recorded in books, is
open to the young man as to the old; and this, doubtless, comprises much
more than the individual experience of any one man; but it does not
comprise all. There are things which books cannot teach. A young man
cannot, unless his history has been a most extraordinary one, possess
either that knowledge of life, which is necessary in the most difficult
and important practical business, or that knowledge of the more
recondite parts of human nature, which is equally necessary for the
foundation of sound ethical and even political principles, but which is
almost the exclusive privilege of him who, like Ulysses, has been
πολύτλας.6 which he, whose mind Edition: current; Page: [295] has not
passed through numerous states, both moral and intellectual, cannot find
out by himself—though he may undoubtedly take upon trust from other
minds, such faint, uncertain, and shadowy conceptions, as we have of a
plant or an animal about which we have merely read. It is true that our
old men, educated as they were, have little enough of all these
advantages; but young men cannot have them. If they are not in the old
men, they are nowhere.

That the habits of old men are fixed, their principles riveted, and that
they swerve not easily from them, instead of a defect, should naturally
be the highest recommendation. It would be so, if the habits which they
acquired in their youth, were still suitable to the state of the human
mind in their old age. When it is otherwise, indeed, the greater
flexibility of the young, their greater accessibility to new ideas and
new feelings, all which would otherwise be termed unsteadiness, renders
them the sole hope of society. But this is nothing to be proud of, or to
rejoice at; it is one of the great causes which combine to render this
state of transition a most dangerous passage to society. The
indispensable requisites for wise thinking and wise conduct in great
affairs, are severed from each other: they are apart, and are not all
found in the same men; nay, they are found in two sets of men, who are,
for the most part, warring with each other. The young must prevail,
though it were only by outliving their antagonists; but the most
important of the qualifications for making a good use of success, are
still to be acquired by them during the struggle. In turbulent times,
knowledge of life and business are rapidly obtained; but a comprehensive
knowledge of human nature is scarcely to be acquired, but by calm
reflexion and observation, in times of political tranquillity; for when
minds are excited, and one man is ranged against another, there are few
who do not contract an invincible repugnance, not only to the errors of
their opponents, but to the truths to which those errors are allied.
Through this state, however, we must struggle; and happy will be the day
when it will once more be true, that with length of years cometh
wisdom,7 and when the necessary privations and annoyances of declining
life shall again, as heretofore, be compensated by the honour and the
gratitude due to increased powers of usefulness, fittingly employed.

A.B.


98.: THE PROSPECTS OF FRANCE
 EXAMINER, 10 APR., 1831, PP. 225-6

Though similar in title to the series “Prospects of France” (beginning
with No. 44), this article is distinct from it. Mill was concerned now
to defend the Revolution of 1830 from accusations that it had not lived
up to the expectations of its supporters (a problem that was to recur in
Britain after the Reform Act of 1832). The article, the first in the
“Political Edition: current; Page: [296] Examiner,” is headed as title.
Unlike the earlier series of articles, which were all signed “S—.”, this
is unsigned. Described in Mill’s bibliography as “An article headed ‘The
Prospects of France,’ in the Examiner of 10th April 1831” (MacMinn, p.
15), the item is listed as “Prospects of France” and enclosed in square
brackets in the Somerville College set; though not within the square
brackets, the epigraph is here included.

-   

    War is a game which, were their subjects wise,
-   

    Kings would not play at; nations would do well
-   

    To extort their truncheons from the puny hands
-   

    Of heroes, whose infirm and baby minds
-   

    Are gratified with mischief; and who spoil,
-   

    Because men suffer it, their toy—the world.1

the situation of france at present is extremely critical, and it is of
the utmost importance that it should be rightly understood.

It is not to be denied that, up to this moment, the Revolution of 1830
has brought forth none but bitter fruits;—the ruin of hundreds of
opulent families; thousands of industrious workmen thrown out of
employment; perpetual apprehension of internal tumults or foreign war;
the most grievous disappointments; the most violent political
dissensions; and, finally, a Government not more democratic in its
constitution—not more popular in its spirit—and, by the necessity of its
false position, not less oppressive and anti-national in its acts, than
that of Charles X. Seeing this, the enemies of free institutions
throughout Europe insultingly exclaim, “What has France gained by her
Revolution?” and men look grave, and dilate on the fresh example now
afforded of the miseries inevitably attendant even on the most
legitimate and best-conducted popular insurrections.

To all this, the answer is, that the circumstances of France and the
character of the French nation are grievously mistaken, if it is
imagined that the people of France made their Revolution under the
conception that it was a thing to gain by. There is no country,
probably, in the world, where the evils of a popular convulsion are more
highly estimated, or more nervously dreaded, than in France. Can it be
otherwise, after the events of the last forty years? It is well known
that evils with which we are only acquainted through description, and by
means of general terms, scarcely ever affect our imagination with the
same proportionate force with which they influence our reason. There
are, probably, very few persons in Great Britain who are not convinced
that a convulsion in our own country, with its enormous masses of
indigent intelligence, and its utter absence of individual sympathies
binding together the high and the low, would be a far more terrible
catastrophe than a Revolution in France. There are few of us, moreover,
who are not convinced in our understandings, that such an event is upon
the cards; and yet, so little is the thought, or its attendant emotions,
familiar Edition: current; Page: [297] to us—so little are we used to
contemplate a Revolution at home as in the category of possible
phenomena—that our reason only, not our imagination, believes in the
possibility; and we eat, drink, and sleep, with our accustomed
regularity, and perform all the round of daily occupations with our
wonted tranquillity, knowing and saying all the while, that we are on
the brink of an abyss. But such is by no means the case in France.
There, even in the midst of that exemplary populace, the “people of
property” lock up their strong boxes at every knocking at the door, and
hear the roar of anarchy and devastation in every breeze. “The burnt
child dreads the fire,” is an every-day truth; but there is an Italian
proverb still more accurately suited to their case—“The scalded dog
fears cold water.”

L’ordre public in France is a talismanic expression,2 which has power
not only to raise, but to charm down the most potent spirits. And it is
as much in the interest of one as the other of the two rival idols,
Order and Liberty, that the hommes du mouvement3 protest against the
“lame and impotent conclusion”4 which the Stationaries are desirous of
putting to the Revolution of July.

The Stationaries had nothing to do with the Revolution of July. Not one
name of note in their ranks was allowed by its owner to be compromised
until the struggle was over. The same terror which now rouses them, then
paralysed them. They disliked the late Government—they disliked the
Ordinances5—but they dreaded the people, and the leaders of the people,
far more. The Revolution was the work exclusively of the hommes du
mouvement; of those with whom the Government which has emanated from the
Revolution is at open war. And why of them, and them alone? Not because
they were what is absurdly called Revolutionists; as if there were, or
ever had been, since the first institution of Governments, any human
being who was a Revolutionist. No; but because they alone united a wish
for good government, with courage to brave the necessary dangers of the
struggle for it; because all the professed Liberals, them alone
excepted, were either too lukewarm in their patriotism to be inclined to
make any sacrifice for obtaining or preserving free institutions, or
else had the misfortune to labour under a panic terror of democracy,
which made them tremble at the idea of calling forth the mass of the
population to contend against the common enemy. The same lukewarmness,
or the same timidity, renders the same men the upholders and instigators
of the present Government in its deplorable system of Edition: current;
Page: [298] statu quo. Under their guidance, the Government has made an
enemy of every man in France, who either stirred, or would have dared to
stir, a finger or a foot to place that Government where it is.

But what better is to be looked for, when it is assumed as the
fundamental principle of politics, that government exists, not to
protect men’s persons and property, and to forward their advancement in
civilization, but to uphold a hereditary monarchy; and that to this end
all progressive and gradual extension of popular rights is to be
avoided, lest in the end it should prove to be a step towards
republicanism? Louis Philippe cannot forget that those who desire that
the present narrow oligarchy of electors should be widened, are headed
by men who believe that a constitutional monarchy, though desirable for
France at present, and for a long time to come, is at the best no more
than a means of transition, to educate the people for a republic. It is
in vain that these very leaders—when they were strong and he was
weak—when they might have assumed the government, instead of resigning
it to him—magnanimously sacrificed their private and speculative
opinions, and consented to accept such a monarchical constitution as
should be compatible with the progressive improvement which had been the
aim of their whole lives. Louis Philippe, like other kings, made his
option in favour of those who were attached to monarchy as an end, not a
means, or who were ready to attach themselves to any established
government; and, by a natural consequence, his throne is now surrounded
almost exclusively by the hired supporters of every government which
would pay them—the timid supporters of every government as long as it
will stand—and some whose virtue, having never before been assailed by
any powerful seductions, wore a goodly appearance, but who have
surrendered the citadel at the first summons—have eaten up their
words—have broken with their friends and with their principles, and
proclaimed themselves in the face of Europe guilty of tergiversation so
shameless, as might surprise and grieve their bitterest enemy.

The aversion of the new oligarchy to improvement, is not confined to
constitutional changes. If we are truly informed, they do not seek to
disguise, either in public or in private, the coldness with which they
look upon all aspirations for benefitting mankind on a large scale, or
for the further advancement of civilization; but especially for
improving the condition of the most numerous and poorest class—a class
which, according to them, is as well off as nature and the constitution
of society permit it to be, and has no business to be dissatisfied while
their property is secure, and they have the disposal of the taxes. Every
one, moreover, who reads their parliamentary debates, must perceive that
personality and intemperance in discussion are nearly confined to the
moderates, who have been most justly, as well as cleverly, called des
hommes furieux de modération.6 Their opponents have far too much good
sense Edition: current; Page: [299] and magnanimity to retaliate; and
whoever wishes for examples of that kind of oratory, in which both what
is said, and the manner of saying it, indicates the greatest and the
truest moderation, should read the speeches of MM. Mauguin and Odilon
Barrot, in the recent debate on the Patriotic Associations.7

It is unfortunate in a thousand ways for all Europe, that the question
of peace and war should have come at this moment to complicate the
difficulties of the present position of France, to place the popular
party, in the estimation of many who would otherwise have sympathized
with them, manifestly in the wrong, and to expose all that has been
gained, and all that might hereafter have been gained, to new and
countless hazards.8 The defeat of France would stop the march of
civilization for another half century: successful she could not be, in
less than three or four campaigns; in that time, the ignominy of
invasion, and the inevitable horrors of war and devastation, would again
rouse the national antipathies which a peace of unusual length has so
greatly mitigated; while, instead of soldier-citizens, five hundred
thousand military ruffians, demoralized and brutalized like those of
Napoleon, might once more overspread Europe, and after enslaving foreign
countries under the forms of liberty, might return prepared to be the
tools of any new usurper in inflicting still worse slavery upon their
own.

We must be just, however, to what is called (incorrectly) the war party
in France. They do not advocate a crusade for liberty, or a war of
propagandism. They know well that the improvement of a nation is not
advanced, but retarded, by popular institutions imposed upon it by
foreign force. It is not in the power of any one to affirm, with
probability, that a nation would be benefitted by a constitutional
government, until it puts forth its strength and seizes one; for,
whatever be the forms of a government—unless it be vigorously upheld by
a preponderance of the physical and intellectual strength of the nation
itself, sufficient to overmatch all domestic attempts at its overthrow,
it must, as the condition of its existence, be carried on,
substantially, in the spirit and with the machinery of a despotism. The
so-called war party have not the folly to think of quixotizing through
all Europe, giving liberty to nations by the sword. But they say that
when a nation has put itself in motion—when it has shown itself eager
for liberal institutions, and ripe for them, by subverting all domestic
opposition, Edition: current; Page: [300] vanquishing the strength of an
established Government, and giving itself, by its own strength, without
foreign aid, a constitution more favourable to the progress of
civilization,—that then no one ought to be permitted to rush down upon
it with the overpowering strength of another nation not equally
advanced, not equally prepared for an improvement in its government, and
overwhelm a united people by superiority of brute force. They say that
non-intervention by one nation in the affairs of another should be laid
down by France as an inflexible rule, which she should herself observe,
and of which she should enforce the observance on all other Governments.
And this, they assert, is the true interest of France herself; and it is
in this view mainly, we may say solely, that they contend for it.

The existence, they say, in France, of a government founded on popular
will, and established on the ruins of legitimacy and divine right, must
necessarily give an impulse to the democratic spirit throughout Europe,
by which, if not restrained, the thrones of all absolute monarchs will
be every year more and more undermined, and, in no long period,
certainly overthrown. The reason and the instinct of those monarchs will
therefore join in indicating to them as the sole chance of saving their
existence as despots, to extinguish the spirit of liberalism in France.
The consequent struggle, the French are aware, will be an arduous and a
perilous one: but those, at least, who are called the war-party, believe
it to be as inevitable as was the still more terrific struggle in 1792.
In this contest they would have for their natural allies the people of
every country in Europe which aspires to free institutions. But what,
they ask, will be our situation, if we allow all to whom we might appeal
in the hour of need to be crushed, one after another, not by their own
governments, but by the armies of foreign despots; who will then have no
enemy but us, and who, after keeping us for an indefinite period in
perpetual agitation, and a state of habitual preparation for war,
implying most of the evils of actual war, without its advantages, will
seize the first favourable moment for pouring their troops across our
frontiers, and reducing us to the necessity of fighting for our very
existence at our own doors, and on our own soil? It is therefore that
Lafayette, and the numerous body whose opinions he represents, contend
for the enforcement, by arms, if necessary, of the principle of
non-intervention.9

And if France had been a united nation, headed by a government which
could trust the people, which the people trusted, and which was able and
dared to call forth the national enthusiasm, this would have been the
true policy of France, and its almost infallible result would have been
not war but peace. When France declared that the entry of foreign troops
into Belgium would be considered a declaration of war, all Europe
applauded, and the Cabinets reluctantly acquiesced. Yet France was then
almost without an army, and many of her Edition: current; Page: [301]
frontier fortresses were in a state almost incapable of defence. But the
imposing unanimity which reigned in the July revolution, struck terror
into the Powers, and they feared to stir. It is Louis Philippe, and his
Chambers, that have marred this glorious position. It is they who, by
placing themselves in a state of hostility against the spirit of the
nation, have destroyed the préstiges of its power, and impressed the
despotic governments with the gratifying assurance that it has too much
upon its hands at home to be formidable abroad. This being the
melancholy fact, the attempt to enforce non-intervention against Austria
in the case of the Papal states would probably lead to war; and the
co-operation of such a spiritless people as that of Romagna, in case of
future hostilities, is so little worth, that it would be unwise in
France to accelerate such a calamity in order to save them. Her policy
now is to throw her shield over Belgium and Switzerland;10 leave events
in other countries to take their course; and, if war is coming, wait
till it comes.


99.: PARAGRAPH ON FRANCE
 EXAMINER, 10 APR., 1831, P. 232

This unheaded editorial comment refers to a letter signed “M” from the
Examiner’s Paris Correspondent, Pierre Martin Maillefer, in which
Maillefer points to the growth of a republican spirit in France,
anticipates a republic with Lafayette at its head, and ends with a
bitter denunciation of the corruption and duplicity of Louis Philippe’s
government and a personal attack on the king and Casimir Périer. The
letter (pp. 231-2) is headed “Foreign Intelligence. (From the
Correspondent of the Examiner)” and dated 2 Apr. The item is not
included in Mill’s bibliography, but is listed as “Paragraph on France”
in the Somerville College index. Though the page number is there given
as 233, this paragraph on p. 232 is enclosed in square brackets in the
bound set.

the state of feeling amongst the young men of France, and the most
estimable of the old patriots, is pourtrayed in the letter of our
Parisian correspondent. There are no new events of importance of which
he does not treat.


100.: FRENCH NEWS [22]
 EXAMINER, 17 APR., 1831, P. 249

This item is headed “London, April 17.” For the entry in Mill’s
bibliography, see No. 55. The item is listed as “Article on France” and
enclosed in square brackets in the Somerville College set.

Edition: current; Page: [302]
the fifteen years of the restoration never furnished anything
approaching to the deplorable exhibition which the French Government is
making in the face of Europe, on the trial of the pretended Republican
Conspirators of December.1 The prosecution cannot establish the most
trifling point. The witnesses who were most relied on, are brought
forward, and have nothing to say; complaining in many cases, that the
eagerness of the Judge before whom they made their preliminary
depositions, had converted the merest trifles into facts of the gravest
import. It is evident that the government has kept innocent men in
prison for several months, and now puts them on trial for their lives,
on no evidence whatever; proceeding upon idle reports, and the
suggestions of its own morbid and unmanly apprehensions. One of the
witnesses summed up his opinion of the whole affair, in words which are
borne out by every fact which has transpired: “There are two sorts of
men who have exaggerated these tumults: terrified men, who take alarm at
every thing, such men as may now be seen exhibited at the Théâtre des
Variétés; and some others, who were willing to stake the lives of their
fellow-citizens against a ribbon, or a place. But they will reap nothing
from it but infamy.”2

The Chamber of Deputies have refused to adopt the amendment, by which
the Peers had cut off a large proportion of the new electors;3 but it
has adopted, on the proposition of M. Casimir Périer, an additional
article,4 which provides that the electoral lists shall be made out from
the tax-books of 1830, instead of 1831; which will prevent the new
taxes, now about to be imposed, from operating to augment still further
the number of electors. This distrust and jealousy of the people, shown
at the very moment when the hand of the tax-gatherer is to be thrust
deeper into their pockets, has created the most lively dissatisfaction
among all but the admirers of the “juste milieu,” or statu-quo system.

Edition: current; Page: [303]


101.: CAVAIGNAC’S DEFENCE
 EXAMINER, 24 APR., 1831, P. 266

For the background, see No. 100, n1. This paragraph introduces a
translation that is given in App. A. It is the first item in the
“Foreign Intelligence” of the Examiner, subheaded “France,” Not listed
in Mill’s bibliography or in the Somerville College set, the translation
is acknowledged as his by Mill in a letter to Thomas Carlyle of 25 Nov.,
1833 (EL, CW, Vol. XII, p. 194); there can be little doubt that the
introductory paragraph is also his.

the pretended republican conspirators have been acquitted, and carried
in triumph through the streets of Paris. Our daily papers being unable
to find room at the present juncture for French news of any interest or
importance, but only for loose talk and idle speculation, we think it a
duty to present our readers with a translation of part of M. Cavaignac’s
defence; that they may see what manner of men those are whom the
satellites of power load with abuse, whom the government has not feared
nor been ashamed to put on trial upon a capital charge, and who, it has
been supposed by good-natured, timid friends of freedom, both in this
country and in France, must needs be firebrands and sowers of sedition,
seeing that the citizen king and his government cannot rest in their
beds on account of them.


102.: FRENCH NEWS [23]
 EXAMINER, 24 APR., 1831, P. 267

This item, headed “London, April 24”, is not covered by the inclusive
entry in Mill’s bibliography cited at No. 55, which ends at 17 Apr.
However, it is listed as “Article on France” and enclosed in square
brackets in the Somerville College set.

the chamber of deputies is prorogued, and will shortly be dissolved.
Thus, in the two greatest nations in the world, general elections will
simultaneously take place, and the new legislative bodies will be
simultaneously called upon to determine the future constitution of their
country.1

The speech of Louis Philippe2 expresses his determination to maintain
the charter, and speaks of the good disposition of foreign powers
towards France: it is empty and formal, and precisely such a speech as
might have been concocted by our last administration.

Edition: current; Page: [304]


103.: THE SPIRIT OF THE AGE, V [Part 1]
 EXAMINER, 15 MAY, 1831, P. 307

For the context and entry in Mill’s bibliography, see No. 73. The
article, listed as “The Spirit of the Age, No. 5” and enclosed in square
brackets in the Somerville College set, is also there corrected in
eleven places: “which, it” is altered to “which it” (305.20), “pale,
because” to “pale because” (305.26), “Now, when” to “When” (305.39),
“that, situate . . . of the rivals . . . him, even . . . chair,” to
“that (situate . . . of rivals . . . him even . . . chair,)” (306.6-9),
“mankind, the” to “mankind, and the” (306.11), “of menacing” to “for
menacing” (306.12), “low.” to “low;—” (306.14), “them; and” to “them
and” (306.20), “but when” to “but where” (306.22), “indisputably” to
“undisputably” (306.25), and “irretrievable—except” to “irretrievable
except” (307.5). These are all accepted here.

in commencing this series of papers, I intended, and attempted, that the
divisions of my discourse should correspond with those of my subject,
and that each number should comprehend within its own limits all which
was necessary to the expansion and illustration of one single idea. The
nature of the publication, which, as being read by more persons capable
of understanding the drift of such speculations (and by fewer, in
proportion, who are unfit for them) than any other single work, I
considered myself fortunate in being enabled to adopt as a vehicle for
my ideas, compels me to limit the length of each article more than is
compatible with my original plan. I can no longer always hope that every
paper should be complete within itself; and the present number, had it
appeared in its proper place, would have formed the continuation of the
last.

In endeavouring to give an intelligible notion of what I have termed the
natural state of society, in respect of moral influence—namely, that
state in which the opinions and feelings of the people are, with their
voluntary acquiescence, formed for them, by the most cultivated minds
which the intelligence and morality of the times call into existence;
and in drawing attention to the striking differences between this
natural state and our present transitional condition, in which there are
no persons to whom the mass of the uninstructed habitually defer, and in
whom they trust for finding the right, and for pointing it out; I have
hitherto illustrated the former state only by the example of those
commonwealths, in which the most qualified men are studiously picked out
because of their qualifications, and invested with that worldly power,
which, if it were in any other hands, would divide or eclipse their
moral influence: but which, placed in theirs, and acting partly as a
certificate of authority, and partly as a cause, tends naturally to
render their power over the minds of their fellow-citizens paramount and
irresistible.

But it is not solely in such societies that there is found a united body
of moral authority, sufficient to extort acquiescence from the
uninquiring, or uninformed Edition: current; Page: [305] majority. It is
found, likewise, in all societies where religion possesses a sufficient
ascendancy, to subdue the minds of the possessors of worldly power, and
where the spirit of the prevailing religion is such as excludes the
possibility of material conflict of opinion among its teachers.

These conditions exist among two great stationary communities—the
Hindoos and the Turks; and are doubtless the chief cause which keeps
those communities stationary. The same union of circumstances has been
hitherto found only in one progressive society—but that, the greatest
which had ever existed: Christendom in the middle ages.

For many centuries, undivided moral influence over the nations of
Europe, the unquestioned privilege of forming the opinions and feelings
of the Christian world, was enjoyed, and most efficiently exercised by
the Catholic clergy. Their word inspired in the rest of mankind the most
fervent faith. It not only absolutely excluded doubt, but caused the
doubter to be regarded with sentiments of profound abhorrence, which
moralists had never succeeded in inspiring for the most revolting of
crimes. It is certainly possible to feel perfectly sure of an opinion,
without believing that whosoever doubts it will be damned, and should be
burnt: and this last is by no means one of those peculiarities of a
natural state of society which I am at all anxious to see restored. But
the deep earnest feeling of firm and unwavering conviction, which it
pre-supposes, we may, without being unreasonable, lament that it was
impossible, and could not but be impossible, in the intellectual anarchy
of a general revolution in opinion, to transfer unimpaired to the truth.

The priesthood did not claim a right to dictate to mankind, either in
belief or practice, beyond the province of religion and morals, but the
political interests of mankind came not the less within their pale
because they seldom assumed the authority to regulate those concerns by
specific precepts. They gave the sanction of their irresistible
authority to one comprehensive rule, that which enjoined unlimited
obedience to the temporal sovereign: an obligation from which they
absolved the conscience of the believer, only when the sovereign
disputed their authority within their peculiar province: and in that
case they were invariably triumphant, like all those to whom it is given
to call forth the moral sentiments of mankind in all their energy,
against the inducements of mere physical hopes and fears.

The Catholic clergy, at the time when they possessed this undisputed
authority in matters of conscience and belief, were, in point of fact,
the fittest persons who could have possessed it—the then state of
society, in respect of moral influence, answers to the description of a
natural state.

When we consider for how long a period the Catholic clergy were the only
members of the European community who could even read; that they were
the sole depositaries of all the treasures of thought, and reservoirs of
intellectual delight, handed down to us from the ancients; that the
sanctity of their persons Edition: current; Page: [306] permitted to
them alone, among nations of semi-barbarians, the tranquil pursuit of
peaceful occupations and studies; that, howsoever defective the morality
which they taught, they had at least a mission for curbing the unruly
passions of mankind, and teaching them to set a value upon a distant
end, paramount to immediate temptations, and to prize gratifications
consisting of mental feelings above bodily sensation; that (situate in
the position of rivals to the temporal sovereign, drafted chiefly from
the inferior classes of society, from men who otherwise would have been
serfs, and the most lowly among them all having the road open before him
even to the papal chair,) they had the strongest motives to avail
themselves of the means afforded by Christianity, for inculcating the
natural equality of mankind, and the superiority of love and sacrifice
above mere courage and bodily prowess, for menacing the great with the
only terrors to which they were accessible, and speaking to their
consciences in the name of the only superior whom they acknowledged, in
behalf of the low;—Reflecting on these things, I cannot persuade myself
to doubt that the ascendancy of the Catholic clergy was to be desired,
for that day, even by the philosopher; and that it has been a potent
cause, if even it was not an indispensable condition, of the present
civilization of Europe. Nor is this an apology for the vices of the
Catholic religion: those vices were great and flagrant, and there was no
natural connection between them and the more civilizing and humanizing
features in which all that there was of good in it resided. We may
regret that the influence of the priesthood was not superseded by a
better influence: but where in those days did any such influence exist?

I conclude, therefore, that, during a part of the middle ages, not only
worldly power, as already shown, but moral influence also, was
undisputedly exercised by the most competent persons; and that the
conditions of a natural state of society were then fully realized.

But the age of transition arrived. A time came when that which had
overmatched and borne down the strongest obstacles to improvement,
became itself incompatible with improvement. Mankind outgrew their
religion, and that, too, at a period when they had not yet outgrown
their government, because the texture of the latter was more yielding,
and could be stretched. We all know how lamentably effectual an
instrument the influence of the Catholic priesthood then became, for
restraining that expansion of the human intellect, which could not any
longer consist with their ascendancy, or with the belief of the
doctrines which they taught.

The more advanced communities of Europe succeeded, after a terrific
struggle, in effecting their total or partial emancipation: in some, the
Reformation achieved a victory—in others, a toleration; while, by a fate
unhappily too common, the flame which had been kindled where the pile
awaited the spark, spread into countries where the materials were not
yet sufficiently prepared; and instead of burning down the hateful
edifice, it consumed all that Edition: current; Page: [307] existed
capable of nourishing itself, and was extinguished. The germs of
civilization to come were scorched up and destroyed; the hierarchy
reigned stronger than ever, amidst the intellectual solitude which it
had made: and the countries which were thus denuded of the means of
further advancement, fell back into barbarism irretrievable except by
foreign conquest. Such is the inevitable end, when, unhappily, changes
to which the spirit of the age is favourable, can be successfully
resisted. Civilization becomes the terror of the ruling powers, and that
they may retain their seat, it must be their deliberate endeavour to
barbarize mankind. There has been, since that day, one such attempt, and
only one, which has had a momentary success: it was that of a man in
whom all the evil influences of his age were concentered with an
intensity and energy truly terrific, less tempered by any of its good
influences than could appear possible in the times in which he lived—I
need scarcely say that I refer to Napoleon. May his abortive effort to
uncivilize human nature, to uncultivate the mind of man, and turn it
into a desolate waste, be the last!

It remains to trace the history of moral influence in the nations of
Europe, subsequently to the Reformation.


104.: MLLE LEONTINE FAY [1]
 EXAMINER, 15 MAY, 1831, P. 310

This, Mill’s first artistic notice, perhaps not by chance on a French
actress, was followed in the next Examiner by a fuller account (see No.
106) of the talents of Jeanne Louise Baron (called Léontine) Fay
(1810-76), who had begun with children’s roles. Her London repertoire
included some sixteen plays in thirteen appearances, with Mlle Fay
playing in two or even three of the playlets each evening, including
three performances each of Yelva, ou L’orpheline russe; Louise, ou La
réparation; Valérie, ou La jeune aveugle; Le Quaker et la danseuse, and
Une faute. She was engaged in London by Pierre François Laporte
(1799-1841), actor and theatrical entrepreneur, who managed the King’s
Theatre in the Haymarket, 1828-31 and 1833-41, bringing there such
Italian operas as La sonnambula, I puritani, and Norma. The article,
headed “French Theatre, Haymarket,” appears in the “Theatrical
Examiner.” It is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A paragraph on
Mlle Léontine Fay, in the Examiner of 15th May 1831” (MacMinn, p. 16),
and listed (“Paragraph on Madlle Léontine Fay”) and enclosed in square
brackets in the Somerville College set.

m. laporte, whose French company is usually as miserable a travestie of
the French stage as his company at the Opera-house frequently is of an
Italian Lyric theatre, has made atonement for all past faults by
engaging (alas! only for ten nights) Mademoiselle Léontine Fay; an
actress, to see whom, would be of itself a sufficient motive, were there
no other, for journeying to Paris. In all these scenes from domestic
life, whether of tragic or of comic interest, which are the reigning
character, and the peculiar charm of the French stage, this lady is
pre-eminent. Edition: current; Page: [308] We shall speak of her at
greater length in our next paper; meanwhile, we can only entreat our
readers, who are capable of understanding a theatrical performance in
the French language, to see her, and admire for themselves.


105.: THE CROIX DE JUILLET
 EXAMINER, 15 MAY, 1831, P. 313

This article responds to a leading article on French affairs in The
Times, 11 May, 1831, p. 2, which criticizes the French reaction to the
Croix de Juillet, a decoration instituted by Bull. 17, No. 81 (13 Dec.,
1830). The article, headed “London, May 15,” is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “An article on the Croix de Juillet in the Examiner of
the same date [as No. 104], standing as the summary of French news”
(MacMinn, p. 16); it is listed as “Article on France” and enclosed in
square brackets in the Somerville College set, where one correction
(here adopted) is made: at 308.29, “incapable of, comprehending” is
altered to “incapable of comprehending”.

a law, passed in the late session of the French Chamber of Deputies, had
decreed a peculiar decoration to those who had fought for the freedom of
their country in the three days of July. A commission was appointed,
which, by a careful and protracted investigation, ascertained who were
the parties entitled to this national testimonial; and it was supposed
that nothing further was necessary to authorise them to wear it: but no;
the medal bears the words, “donné par le roi,” and no one is to receive
it without taking an oath of fidelity to Louis Philippe. Against this
the majority of the parties entitled to the decoration have protested:
have refused to accept it, subject to these conditions; and asserted
their right, and their intention, to wear it free from any conditions
whatever, by virtue of the law, and of the decision of the commission of
national rewards.

For this The Times soundly rates them, in the stile in which a nurse
scolds a self-willed child; and threatens them with the ridicule of
Europe for their frivolity. The Times might have spared itself the pains
of demonstrating, by another conclusive proof, that it is not only
utterly ignorant of, but utterly incapable of comprehending, the
national character of the French. The last of our public writers who
still holds fast to the idle phrases of “our lively neighbours,” “our
volatile neighbours,”1 has great need of putting himself to school
before he gives lectures to a people who, as all mankind know, except
himself, have undergone some rather remarkable metamorphoses since the
days of their grandfathers. Is it necessary to repeat, once more, that
the French of the present Edition: current; Page: [309] day are a far
more serious people than the English; that their national character is
grave, earnest, and enthusiastic; that frivolity has fled from them with
its parent aristocracy, and that the gibes of forty years ago might now,
with far greater justice, be retorted by “our volatile neighbours”
against ourselves?

If the writer in The Times knew any thing of la jeune France,2 he would
know that, by all the more ardent and generous portion of it, a ribbon,
a title, a favour, a distinction of any kind proceeding from a king, or
a court, is held in supreme contempt. He would know that the medal of
July is the only decoration sanctioned by the French law, which
nine-tenths of the combatants of the three days of July would accept:
and that, because it does not proceed from a King: because it is not a
mark that they have dangled in an ante-chamber, and mingled in the crowd
of place-hunters, and candidates for court favour: it is the reward of a
specific service, attached to that service by inflexible law, and not by
a man’s flexible will. Deprive it of this character, and you place it on
a level with the Cross of St. Louis, or that of the Legion of Honour,3
which have been made the prize of sycophancy and favouritism by
successive governments, until it is considered a degradation to accept
them. When the Schools, and the National Guard, with one accord,
declined the crosses which the King had offered to confer upon a certain
number of the most deserving, the reason which they gave was, that no
one of them was more deserving than the rest: the reason which every one
knew to be the real one, was contempt for the prostituted distinction.
Yet to this the King, unauthorised by the law, thought fit to assimilate
the testimonial of a grateful nation to the heroes of July.

Not less offence was given by the oath of fidelity to the King, exacted
from men, two-thirds of whom are, from conviction, and without disguise,
republicans. A government may have a right to annex conditions to its
favours, but not to its justice: it may treat those who will not swear
to uphold it, as disqualified for serving it, but not as excluded from
the reward of services previously performed. They may disapprove of the
existing constitution, but their hands aided to build it up: the deeds
which France has thought worthy of a national testimonial were not the
less done by them, and a service to their country is entitled to its
appointed reward, even though it were achieved by men who have no
attachment to their King. It is contended, and justly, that an oath of
allegiance may be exacted from a public functionary, but from a private
citizen never. These men might have been public functionaries if they
would, there are many of them to whom places were offered; but they
preferred to retain the freedom of their individual opinion, and upon
that no government, they assert, Edition: current; Page: [310] has a
right to encroach, by requiring a profession of faith from the labourer
before adjudging him worthy of his hire.4


106.: MLLE LEONTINE FAY [2]
 EXAMINER, 22 MAY, 1831, PP. 325-6

For background, see No. 104. This article, headed “French Theatre,”
appears in the “Theatrical Examiner.” It is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “An article on Mlle Léontine Fay in the Examiner of 22d
May 1831” (MacMinn, p. 16), and is listed (“Article on Madlle Léontine
Fay”) and enclosed in square brackets in the Somerville College set.

it is difficult to characterise or to criticise the performances of
Mademoiselle Léontine Fay, because it is difficult to try by any
standard that which might itself serve as a standard for trying every
thing we could liken to it. It is impossible to describe what is her
style, or in what character she excels; because she is not one of those
persons who have a style, or who excel in any particular parts. If she
were, she could not be, as she is, a woman of genius. An actor may
distinguish himself in a certain line of characters, from a natural
similitude in the turn of his own thoughts and feelings, to those which
he is required to represent; or from possessing some incidental
endowments, for the display of which such parts afford a peculiar scope.
Or he may attain the semblance of greater variety and more abundant
resources, by the mere ape-like quality of imitation: by the faculty of
making his own voice, and his own face and limbs, reproduce the sounds,
the motions, and the attitudes, which he has happened to hear and see.
But what is hearing or seeing, without understanding? If he imitate the
mere signs, without well knowing and intimately feeling what they are
signs of, it matters not how accurately he may observe, nor how ample
may have been his opportunities of observing; no care and pains will
prevent a thousand inconsistencies from creeping in, or a thousand of
the finer traits from escaping his notice. Let the most careful penman
attempt to copy a long passage, in a language of which he does not
understand one word, and we doubt whether, even if he were a Chinese, he
could help making a hundred mistakes in spelling before the end.

A great actor must possess imagination, in the higher and more extensive
meaning of the word: that is, he must be able to conceive correctly, and
paint vividly within himself, states of external circumstances, and of
the human mind, into which it has not happened to himself to be thrown.
This is one of the rarest Edition: current; Page: [311] of all
endowments; which is the reason why there are so few great dramatists
and great actors. But he who is thus endowed, if he can act one
character, can act all characters; at least, all which are in nature.
And this is what is meant by the universality of genius. Let him who
wishes it to be practically illustrated, go to see Mademoiselle Léontine
Fay.

There is no mystery in this. If the actor were really such a person as
the author conceived, and were really placed in the situation which the
play supposes, he would actually have the thoughts and feelings which
the author has pourtrayed: or else, the dramatist has not done his
duty,—his conception is not in nature. But it rarely happens that the
actor resembles the person he represents; and he never is in the precise
situation. Yet, if he possesses sufficient sensibility and imagination
to conceive vividly the character and the situation, this vivid
conception will of itself suggest to him the very thoughts and feelings
which he himself would have if he were such a character, and were placed
in such a situation. He will think them and feel them, not indeed in so
lively a manner as if the case really were his own, but vividly enough
to represent them in the true colours of nature. This is the secret of
great histrionic as well as of great dramatic genius; and we suspect
that the other fine arts might equally be included in the assertion.

By this test, the sensibility and imagination of Mademoiselle Léontine
Fay must be of the highest order. From the deepest tragedy to the gayest
comedy, she identifies herself with every part, until you would swear
that it, and it alone, was her own nature: that is, if the part be in
nature. We apprehend, indeed, that in what are commonly called
tragedies, or in the hotchpotch of buffoonery and caricature which men
call a farce, she would be sadly at fault; for she has nothing
conventional; and if she cannot find in herself something which answers
to the words of the author, and from which those words might emanate,
she would probably be more embarrassed in attempting to utter them than
the feeblest and most insipid personage who ever tuned her voice to the
sing-song of the theatre. Wherever feeling and taste are hindrances
instead of helps, we are persuaded that Mademoiselle Léontine would
fail. But this is seldom the case in the little dramas of the modern or
recent French stage, in which alone she ever performs. These are of
various degrees of merit, but they are always pictures of the real
feelings of real human beings; they paint from the life, and not from
faded paintings of manners and habits which never existed, or which have
passed by. The genius of Mademoiselle Léontine ranges through several
hundreds of such pieces, some of them exquisite, all natural and true;
some calling forth a part of her wonderful powers; a few, very few,
affording adequate scope to the whole.

For ourselves, had we written a drama of real life, whether of serious
or comic interest, we should not desiderate any higher proof of its
being true to nature throughout, than that it was such a piece as
Mademoiselle Léontine could play.

Edition: current; Page: [312]


107.: THE SPIRIT OF THE AGE, V [Part 2]
 EXAMINER, 29 MAY, 1831, PP. 339-41

This article is the last in the series beginning with No. 73 (q.v.),
though the concluding paragraph makes it clear that Mill had further
articles in mind; as late as October 1831, he was telling Sterling of
his plans “(when the Reform Bill shall have past) to resume [his] series
of papers headed the Spirit of the Age” (EL, CW, Vol. XII, p. 80). The
article is headed: “The Spirit of the Age. / No. V. (concluded.)” and in
the Somerville College set is similarly listed (“The Spirit of the Age,
No. 5 concluded”) and enclosed in square brackets.

in the countries which remained Catholic, but where the Catholic
hierarchy did not retain sufficient moral ascendancy to succeed in
stopping the progress of civilization, the church was compelled, by the
decline of its separate influence, to link itself more and more closely
with the temporal sovereignty. And thus did it retard its own downfal,
until the spirit of the age became too strong for the two united, and
both fell together to the ground.

I have said that the three sources of moral influence are, supposed
wisdom and virtue, the sacerdotal office, and the possession of worldly
power. But in Protestant countries, the authority of the ministers of
religion, considered as an independent source of moral influence, must
be blotted out from the catalogue. None of the churches which were the
successors of the Catholic church in the nations in which the
Reformation prevailed, succeeded, as churches, to any portion of the
moral influence of their predecessor. The reason is, that no Protestant
church ever claimed a special mission from the Deity to itself; or ever
numbered among the obligations of religion, that of receiving its
doctrines from teachers accredited by that particular church. The
Catholics received the priest from God, and their religion from the
priest. But in the Protestant sects, you resorted to the teacher,
because you had already decided, or because it had been decided for you,
that you would adopt his religion. In the popular religions you chose
your own creed, and having so done, you naturally had recourse to its
ministers;—in the state religions, your creed was chosen for you by your
worldly superiors, and you were instigated by conscience, or, it may be,
urged by motives of a more worldly nature, to resort for religious
instruction to the minister of their appointment.

Every head of a family, even of the lowest rank, in Scotland, is a
theologian; he discusses points of doctrine with his neighbours, and
expounds the scripture to his family. He defers, indeed, though with no
slavish deference, to the opinion of his minister; but in what capacity?
only as a man whom his understanding owns as being at least more versed
in the particular subject—as being probably a wiser, and possibly, a
better man than himself. This is not the influence of an interpreter of
religion, as such; it is that of a purer heart, and a more cultivated
Edition: current; Page: [313] intelligence. It is not the ascendancy of
a priest: it is the combined authority of a professor of religion, and
an esteemed private friend.

What I have said of the Scottish church, may be said of all Protestant
churches, except state churches (which the Scottish church,
notwithstanding its national endowment, is not). It may be said of all
dissenters from our own establishment; except, indeed, those who inherit
their religion, and adhere to it (not an uncommon case) as they would to
any other family connexion. To the followers of the Church of England, a
similar observation is wholly inapplicable: those excepted, who would
abide by that communion for its doctrine, were it a dissenting sect. The
people in general have not, nor ever had, any reason or motive for
adhering to the established religion, except that it was the religion of
their political superiors: and in the same ratio as their attachment to
those superiors has declined, so has their adherence to the established
church. From the time when the Church of England became firmly seated in
its temporalities; from the period when its title to the fee-simple of
our consciences acquired the sanctity of prescription, and when it was
enabled to dispense with any support but what it derived from the stable
foundations of the social fabric of which it formed a part; it sunk from
its independent rank, into an integral part, or a kind of appendage, of
the aristocracy. It merged into the higher classes: and what moral
influence it possessed, was merely a portion of the general moral
influence of temporal superiors.

From the termination, therefore, of that period of intellectual
excitement and hardy speculation which succeeded the crisis of the
Reformation, and which was prolonged in our own country to the end of
the seventeenth century;—that moral influence, that power over the minds
of mankind, which had been for so many ages the unquestioned heritage of
the Catholic clergy, passed into the hands of the wealthy classes, and
became united with worldly power. The ascendancy of the aristocracy was
not so dictatorial and enthralling as that of the Catholic priesthood;
because it was backed in a far inferior degree by the terrors of
religion: and because unity of doctrine was not maintained, by the same
powerful means, among the dominant class itself. Nevertheless, the
higher classes set the fashion, as in dress, so in opinion. The opinions
generally received among them, were the prevalent ones throughout the
rest of the nation. A bookish man here and there might have his
individual theories, but they made no converts. All who had no opinions
of their own, assumed those of their superiors. Few men wrote and
published doctrines which the higher classes did not approve; or if
published, their books were successfully cried down, or at best, were
little read or attended to. Such questions, and such only, as divided
the aristocracy, were (modestly) debated by the people: whose various
denominations or divisions were each headed by an aristocratic côterie.
Even the Dissenters made amends for their preference of a vulgar
religion, by evincing a full measure of pliability and acquiescence in
all that concerned politics and social life; though the banner they
Edition: current; Page: [314] in general followed, was that of a section
of the aristocracy less wedded than the other section to the monopoly of
the sect which possessed advowsons and archbishoprics.

The wealthy classes, then, from the revolution downwards, possessed all
that existed both of moral authority and worldly power. Under their
influence grew up the received doctrines of the British constitution;
the opinions, respecting the proper limits of the powers of government,
and the proper mode of constituting and administering it, which were
long characteristic of Englishmen. Along with these arose a vast variety
of current opinions respecting morality, education, and the structure of
society. And feelings in unison with those opinions, spread far, and
took a deep root in the English mind.

At no time, during this period, could the predominant class be said,
with truth, to comprise among its members all the persons qualified to
govern men’s minds, or to direct their temporal interests, whom the
state of society afforded. As a whole, however, that class contained,
for a long time, a larger share of civilization and mental culture, than
all other classes taken together. The difficulties, to men of merit and
energy, of lifting themselves into that class, were not insuperable; and
the leading and active spirits among the governing body, had capacity to
comprehend intellectual superiority, and to value it. The conditions,
therefore, of a natural state of society were for some time, upon the
whole, tolerably well fulfilled.

But they have now ceased to be fulfilled. The government of the wealthy
classes was, after all, the government of an irresponsible few; it
therefore swarmed with abuses. Though the people, by the growth of their
intelligence, became more and more sensible of whatever was vicious in
their government, they might possibly have borne with it, had they
themselves remained as they were formerly, unfit, and conscious of their
unfitness, for the business of government. But the comparative freedom
of the practical administration of our Constitution—the extensive
latitude of action which it allowed to the energies of
individuals—enabled the people to train themselves in every habit
necessary for self-government; for the rational management of their own
affairs. I believe it would be impossible to mention any portion
whatever of the business of government (except some parts of the defence
of the country against external enemies), of which the exact counterpart
is not, in some instance or other, performed by a committee chosen by
the people themselves: performed with less means, and under incomparably
greater difficulties, but performed unexceptionably, and to the general
satisfaction of the persons interested. It is notorious that much of the
most important part of what in most other countries composes the
business of government, is here performed wholly by voluntary
associations: and other portions are done by the government in so clumsy
and slovenly a manner, that it is found necessary to have recourse to
voluntary associations as a subsidiary resource.

Edition: current; Page: [315]
When the people were thus trained to self-government, and had learned by
experience that they were fit for it, they could not continue to suppose
that none but persons of rank and fortune were entitled to have a voice
in the government, or were competent to criticise its proceedings. The
superior capacity of the higher ranks for the exercise of worldly power
is now a broken spell.

It was in the power of those classes, possessed as they were of leisure
and boundless opportunities of mental culture, to have kept themselves
on the level of the most advanced intellects of the age; not to have
been overtopped by the growth around them of a mass of intelligence,
superior, on the average, to their own. They might also have preserved
the confidence of the people in the integrity of their purposes, by
abating each abuse, in proportion as the public conscience rose against
it. They might thus have retained, in right of their virtue and
intellect, that moral ascendancy which an intelligent people never long
continues to yield to mere power. But they have flung away their
advantages.

I have already adverted to the decline of the higher classes in active
talent, as they became enervated by lazy enjoyment. In the same ratio in
which they have advanced in humanity and refinement, they have fallen
off in energy of intellect and strength of will. Many of them were
formerly versed in business: and into the hands of such, the remainder
committed the management of the nation’s affairs. Now, the men of
hereditary wealth are mostly inexperienced in business, and unfit for
it. Many of them formerly knew life and the world: but their knowledge
of life is now little more than the knowledge of two or three hundred
families, with whom they are accustomed to associate; and it may be
safely asserted, that not even a fellow of a college is more ignorant of
the world, or more grossly mistakes the signs of the times, than an
English nobleman. Their very opinions,—which, before they had passed
into aphorisms, were the result of choice, and something like an act of
the intelligence,—are now merely hereditary. Their minds were once
active—they are now passive: they once generated impressions—they now
merely take them. What are now their political maxims? Traditional
texts, relating, directly or indirectly, to the privileges of their
order, and to the exclusive fitness of men of their own sort for
governing. What is their public virtue? Attachment to these texts, and
to the prosperity and grandeur of England, on condition that she shall
never swerve from them; idolatry of certain abstractions, called church,
constitution, agriculture, trade, and others: by dint of which they have
gradually contrived, in a manner, to exclude from their minds the very
idea of their living and breathing fellow-citizens, as the subjects of
moral obligation in their capacity of rulers. They love their country as
Bonaparte loved his army—for whose glory he felt the most ardent zeal,
at a time when all the men who composed it, one with another, were
killed off every two or three years. They do not love England as one
loves human beings, but as a man loves his house or his acres.

Being such persons as has now been described, and being at last
completely Edition: current; Page: [316] found out by the more
intelligent, they no longer retain sufficient moral influence to give,
as heretofore, vogue and currency to their opinions. But they retain—and
the possessors of worldly power must always retain—enough of that
influence, to prevent any opinions, which they do not acknowledge, from
passing into received doctrines. They must, therefore, be divested of
the monopoly of worldly power, ere the most virtuous and best-instructed
of the nation will acquire that ascendancy over the opinions and
feelings of the rest, by which alone England can emerge from this crisis
of transition, and enter once again into a natural state of society.

A few months before the first of these papers was written, it would have
seemed a paradox to assert that the present aera is one of moral and
social transition. The same proposition now seems almost the tritest of
truisms. The revolution which had already taken place in the human mind,
is rapidly shaping external things to its own form and proportions.

That we are in a state of transition, is a point which needs no further
illustration. That the passage we are in the midst of, will conduct us
to a healthier state, has perhaps been rendered probable in the
preceding papers, to some few who might otherwise have questioned it.

But it greatly imports us to obtain a far deeper insight into the
futurity which awaits us, and into the means by which the blessings of
that futurity may be best improved, and its dangers avoided.

How shall we attain this insight? By a careful survey of the properties
which are characteristic of the English national mind, in the present
age—for on these the future fate of our country must depend.

But “fit audience,” even “though few,”1 cannot be found for such
discussions, at a moment when the interests of the day and of the hour
naturally and properly engross every mind. The sequel of these papers
must therefore be postponed until the interval of repose, after the
present bustle and tumult. I shall resume my subject as early as
possible after the passing of the Reform Bill.2

Edition: current; Page: [317]


108.: DEATH OF THE ABBE GREGOIRE
 EXAMINER, 5 JUNE, 1831, P. 360

In this, Mill’s first obituary notice, he memorializes Henri, abbé
Grégoire (1750-1831), a leading radical and former politician. The
Archbishop of Paris, Quélen, having refused him the last rites unless he
agreed to renounce his oath to the civil constitution, they were
performed without the renunciation by abbé Marie Nicolas Sylvestre
Guillon (1760-1847), a priest, writer, and practitioner of medicine
during the Revolution. At first no church was permitted to receive his
body, but eventually he was buried, to the accompaniment of fiery
speeches, in the cemetery of Montparnasse. These unheaded paragraphs are
described in Mill’s bibliography as “An obituary notice of the abbé
Grégoire in the Examiner of 5th June 1831, included in the summary of
French news” (MacMinn, p. 16); in the Somerville College set they are
similarly listed (without the “An”) and enclosed in square brackets.

the celebrated abbé grégoire has recently died, after an illness of some
length, and in extreme old age. The Archbishop of Paris refused to
authorize the sacraments to be administered to him, or the funeral
service to be performed, considering him as a schismatic, who had not
made his peace with the Church. Clergymen, however, were found to
perform these offices, in spite of the Archbishop. His schism consisted
in having conformed to the ecclesiastical establishment of the
Constituent Assembly, and having accepted the office of a Constitutional
Bishop. M. Grégoire never renounced the Roman Catholic faith, but
adhered to it openly throughout the reign of Terror, either from
conviction, or because he scorned submission to an odious tyranny. Few
characters have been the subject of greater calumny; none ever were more
highly respected by all to whom they were really known. In 1819, the
estimation in which his country held him was evinced in his being
returned to the Chamber of Deputies, without any solicitation on his
part, by the department of the Isère. This provoked a furious debate on
the meeting of the Chamber; and his election was finally pronounced
void, on a point of form.

M. Grégoire was a Member of the Convention when Louis XVI was tried.1
Being absent on deputation, he forwarded his vote in writing; it was for
a verdict of guilty, but against capital punishment: and he persuaded
three colleagues, who were joined with him in the same mission, to do
the like.2 He was, and remained to the last, a firm Republican; and was
one of the first persons in France (along with Brissot,3 and others) who
made any public exertions for the mitigation and final extinction of
Negro slavery.

Edition: current; Page: [318]


109.: ATTACK ON LITERATURE
 EXAMINER, 12 JUNE, 1831, PP. 369-71

This lengthy defence of state pensions for literary worthies was
prompted by a leading article, “Literature and Patronage,” in the
Brighton Guardian, 8 June, 1831, p. 2, from which the quotations, unless
otherwise noted, are taken. The Brighton Guardian responded, and Mill
replied (see No. 111). The article is the first in the “Political
Examiner,” and is headed as title. It is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A leading article headed ‘Attack on Literature’ in
answer to the Brighton Guardian; in the Examiner of 12th June 1831”
(MacMinn, p. 16); it is listed as title and enclosed in square brackets
in the Somerville College set.

in the year 1824, a Society was instituted, under the name of the Royal
Society of Literature. With what definite views it was established, or
what purposes of utility the association, as such, has ever promoted, we
know not; and the members themselves, possibly, know as little. There
were annexed, however, to the Institution, ten pensions, of a hundred
guineas each, from the Privy Purse; to be held by as many persons,
distinguished in the world of letters. And the individuals who were
first selected to hold these moderate stipends were the following (we
quote from the Englishman’s Magazine):1

Samuel Taylor Coleridge; the Rev. Edward Davies; Dr. Jamieson, the
indefatigable compiler of the Scottish Dictionary; the Rev. T.R.
Malthus; Matthias, the author of the Pursuits of Literature; James
Millingen, Esq.; Sir William Ouseley; William Roscoe; the Rev. Henry J.
Todd; and Sharon Turner.*

Edition: current; Page: [319]
Perhaps no act of the late King, which is known to the public, was
altogether so creditable to him as the grant of these pensions. While
the debates on the Civil List are fresh in the recollection of our
readers,2 we need scarcely remind them, that, of what is called the
Privy Purse, a large part is granted by Parliament avowedly for purposes
of liberality and munificence. These pensions were among the best
examples which England had long seen, of well-directed munificence. They
were too inconsiderable to excite the cupidity of tax-eating idlers.
Several of the persons on whom they were bestowed, were in circumstances
which rendered the accession to their incomes of real importance. The
individuals were not selected on any narrow or exclusive principle; but
had distinguished themselves in different modes, and in different walks
of literature and philosophy. All, however, were men of reputation in
their several departments; all, as writers, had proposed to themselves
higher objects than merely to amuse; and none of them could possibly
have acquired affluence, or even respectable subsistence, by such works
as those to which they had dedicated themselves. A. or B. may think some
of the number undeserving of what was bestowed upon them, and may
imagine that he himself could have pointed out individuals better
entitled to be so provided for. This was inevitable. We ourselves, as
well as other people, could have suggested emendations in the list; but
the giver was not bound to please us, or to please A. or B., but to
satisfy the body of educated and cultivated Englishmen: and taking, as
is proper, for the standard, the prevalent opinions and feelings, at the
time when the grant was made, of the bulk of those whose approbation had
the best title to be considered, it would be difficult to point out ten
persons, the selection of whom, as the objects of the Royal liberality,
would have been in every respect so unobjectionable.

These pensions, however, his present Majesty has, it appears, seen fit
to discontinue. It, undoubtedly, rests with the King himself to decide
in what manner that portion of his revenues which is set apart for acts
of generosity, can be most worthily employed; and it is proper that, in
the choice of objects, he should follow his own opinion, and not ours.
On this subject it would be disrespectful to express more than regret,
and our firm conviction that the one thousand guineas per annum which
the Privy Purse will save by the stoppage of this annual bounty, will be
expended, we know not how indeed, but most assuredly in a less useful
manner, and for the benefit of less meritorious persons. We might be
permitted to add, (what has been insisted upon with great force by some
of our contemporaries) that when the odious Pension List, the wages of
political, if not even of personal prostitution—the purchase-money of
despotic power—the fragments of a nation’s spoil which the feasters have
flung from their richly-furnished table to allay the hunger of some of
the baser and more Edition: current; Page: [320] subordinate of their
tools;—when this monument of iniquity has just been screened from
revision, on the ground that, although there had been no promise,
persons naturally expect to keep what they have once got;3—the moment is
ill chosen for resuming the scanty pittance which men, whose lives had
been devoted to usefulness, had every rational ground to calculate upon
retaining for their few remaining years. But it is in this spirit that
an English government usually economizes. Whatever is enormous and
unearned, it leaves undisturbed to the possessors. Its retrenchments
bear uniformly and exclusively upon the ill-paid and the deserving.

But, as Rousseau well observes, one bad maxim is worse than a thousand
bad actions,—because it leads to ten thousand.4 A report that Lord Grey,
at the instigation of Lord Brougham, had tendered to Mr. Coleridge a
grant of two hundred pounds from the Treasury (which, however, Mr.
Coleridge declined),5 has furnished the Brighton Guardian with the
occasion of an article, equal in length to half a page of The Times; the
Vandalism of which, inconceivable, if any Vandalism could be
inconceivable, provokes us to take up the pen. The matter with which the
article is filled, is indeed, or should be, very little formidable, did
the writer merely state the opinion of one rather perverse individual.
But, unfortunately, this perverse person is but one man who is bold
enough to utter what the whole tribe of the dunces are intimately
persuaded of in their hearts, but do not dare to avow. They will soon,
however, pluck up courage to proclaim and act upon it, if they find
themselves countenanced by one or two persons (as this writer has proved
himself to be) not untinctured with letters. It is, therefore, of some
importance to analyse a performance, more abounding in the ideas and
feelings characteristic of uncultivated minds, than is often the case
with the productions of an understanding even superficially cultivated.

The object of the writer is to establish, that men of letters ought, in
no case, to be provided for at the national expense. And though this is,
in our opinion, a mischievous error, it is shared by too many superior
men in the present day, to be matter of serious reproach to any one. It
is a maxim in perfect harmony with the laissez faire spirit of the
prevailing philosophy—with the idea by which, either consciously or
unconsciously, nine-tenths of the men who can read and write, are at
present possessed—viz. that every person, however uneducated or
ill-educated, is the best judge of what is most for his own advantage,
better even than the man whom he would delegate to make laws for him.
The scope of the received doctrines is, to make mankind retrograde, for
a certain space, towards the state of nature; by limiting the ends and
functions of the social union, as strictly as possible, to those of a
mere police. The idea that political society is a Edition: current;
Page: [321] combination among mankind for the purpose of helping one
another in every way in which help can be advantageous, is yet a
stranger to the immense majority of understandings.

But if the conclusion at which this writer arrives, is common to him
with many wiser men than himself, this is not precisely the case with
the premises by which he supports it; for he goes the full length of
averring that literary men are of no use; that the improvement of
mankind is not, in the slightest degree, owing to them or their
writings; and that we should be as far, or farther, advanced in wisdom
and virtue than we now are, if the whole tribe had long since become
extinct.

He begins by accounting for the high estimation in which literary men
are held. It arises, he says, from the fact, that “literary men are the
penholders of society, and they praise themselves and praise their
pursuits.” In part also it is “a sort of traditionary sentiment.” After
the breaking up of the Roman empire, all the knowledge of past times
existed in a dead language; and was accessible only to literary men,
who, consequently, met with “respect, and even veneration.” “There was,
at the period of what is called the revival of learning in Europe, a
considerable mine of valuable knowledge opened by literary men.” This,
however, is no longer the case; because, peradventure, we now know
everything; or, at least, one of us knows no more than another.
Literature “is praised and honoured for what it once did,—not for what
it now does.” He then holds forth as follows:

Do literary men, or does literature now improve and instruct mankind? To
a certain extent, we admit that it does both. But amusement is afforded
to thousands of people by Punch in the street, by a clown at the
theatre, and by the shows at Vauxhall; and we have never heard any
person venture to assert, that a fellow playing on Pan-pipes, making
faces, performing extraordinary leaps, or rattling his chin till it
sounded like a pair of symbols [cymbals],6 was a proper object for the
national bounty, and ought to be pensioned in his old age, if he
dissipated the halfpence or shillings he collected from the crowds. A
man who writes a novel, or a play, or a poem, in respect of amusement,
and in respect of being entitled to public rewards, is on the same
footing as a mountebank or a puppet-showman. It is very possible that
this amusement may be combined with some sentiments that may make the
heart better; and it is equally possible, which we believe is in fact
more generally the case, that the amusement is only made the vehicle of
perverted sentiments, of conveying impurity into the mind, and of
promoting the cause of vice, rather than of virtue. The use of
literature, then, comes to consist in the truth and accurate knowledge
which it contains. Unfortunately, however, those who have taught mankind
truth have been prosecuted, not pensioned. De Foe, Horne Tooke, Thomas
Paine,7 and a Edition: current; Page: [322] number of other writers, who
have been the means of making useful, moral, and scientific truths known
to the world, have been punished by the government, not rewarded.
Governments always have been, and ever will be,—precisely because they
are the offspring of conquest or of fraud, not of reason,—ready to
prohibit literary men from searching after truth; so that if we should
admit that literature, in the abstract, might be harmless, existing
literature must have been mischievous. That system of corruption, which
we are all now eager to pull down, has in fact long been supported by
the majority of literary men. By all who have been pensioned,—by all who
have sought any other patronage than that of the public, this miserable
system has been favourably regarded, and they have endeavoured, and do
endeavour, to uphold it.

Now, if this man’s insight into human nature, and into the future
destination of mankind, does not enable him to form the conception of
any other government than one which is “the offspring of conquest or of
fraud, not of reason”—if his mind is fully made up that the human race
shall for ever, in spite of themselves, have their necks under the feet
of men disposed to restrain and persecute those who search after
truth—it is natural that he should look with small favour on any
literary labours which such governments are likely to esteem deserving
of reward. For our part, we do not hold it to be a law of nature that
governments shall endeavour to stop the progress of the human mind. We
do not believe that, even in the present vicious constitution of
political society, the majority of civilized governments have any such
purpose, or are actuated by any such spirit. And we look forward to a
time, and no very distant one, in which all the more vulgar and
subordinate purposes of government will merge in one grand purpose of
advancing the progress of civilization. Proceeding upon premises so
different from those of our contemporary, no wonder that we should
quarrel with his conclusion.

We must, however, [says he,] go a step further in speaking of
literature, and say that it has little or no influence over the progress
of society. It is the consequence, not the cause, of civilization.
Literary men and philosophers may flatter themselves that they possess a
great power over the hearts and minds of their fellow-men, and over the
progress of society; but experience teaches a different lesson. Man is
taught by events, not by books, which too often obscure the most plain
facts.

For “it is now upwards of three hundred years since Sir Thomas More made
those beautiful observations on punishing theft by death;”8 and theft
still continues to be thus punished. “It is now also a hundred and
thirty-nine years since Sir Dudley North published his Discourses on
Trade;”9 and he wrote in vain, till there arose “a want of markets for
our produce:” and “it is upwards of two hundred years since Lord Bacon
taught that man was but the minister and Edition: current; Page: [323]
interpreter of nature;”10 notwithstanding which, literary men are
constantly recommending alterations in the structure of society; which,
according to this writer, is a gross absurdity, since “human society, in
its complicated relations, is as much a part of creation as minerals or
flowers;” a proposition which is about as good an argument against
improvements in the social science, as it would be against improvements
in mining or horticulture.

So, because a man of genius may have an idea too far in advance of his
age to gain many converts in it, men of genius have no more influence
upon the destinies of society than dunces have. Because Sir Thomas More
did not convince mankind of the barbarism of capital punishment, the
labours of Beccaria, of Voltaire, of Bentham, of Romilly, in the same
cause, have been useless and of none effect.11 Because Sir Dudley North
perceived the advantages of free trade, while the politicians of the
world, both practical and theoretical, did not read him, or were too
stupid, or too much engrossed by other subjects, to understand him,
therefore the truth which he detected would by this time have been
incorporated in our laws, if Adam Smith, and Say, and Ricardo,12 and all
men resembling them, had never existed. And this, because “man is taught
by events, not books;” and events, it seems, never have any need of an
interpreter; their language is as intelligible to any blockhead, who is
not deaf, as to the greatest genius. If Newton had never lived, his
next-door neighbour, no doubt, might have seen an apple fall, and in due
time would have evolved the Principia,13 for man is taught by events.

This “ignorance of what mankind owe to books” (if we may borrow an
expression from Mr. Coleridge)14 is most pitiable. We contend, in
opposition to Edition: current; Page: [324] our contemporary, that
mankind, instead of not being indebted to men of highly-cultivated
intellects for any of the steps of their progress, are indebted to them
for every step. Events might have spoken, or even cried aloud, but they
would have spoken a foreign language: mankind could not have profited,
and do not profit, even by the lessons of their personal experience,
until a man of genius arises to construe those lessons for them. Before
the press existed, the leading minds of a nation could bring themselves
into contact with the national mind only by means of speech. The forum,
the theatre, the pulpit, the school, were then the sources of
illumination and mental culture. Since the discovery of printing, books
are the medium by which the ideas, the mental habits, and the feelings,
of the most exalted and enlarged minds are propagated among the inert,
unobserving, unmeditative mass. And we challenge our adversary to a
historical trial of the fact. From the Reformation to the present
Parliamentary Reform Bill, he will not find one great moral or social
improvement, the origin of which cannot be distinctly traced to the
labours of men of letters. No one man of genius, it is probable, was
ever indispensable; because, what he did, it is likely might have been
done by some other: but by another man of genius. Had it not been for a
few great minds, mankind would never have emerged from the savage state.
Let the series of great minds be once broken off, and it is not clear
that we shall not relapse into barbarism.

But mark the pseudo-metaphysical theory, which serves as a pedestal to
this fine philosophical system. “Instead of society being modelled on,
or formed by, the opinions of literary men or philosophers, all their
opinions, as far as they are correct, are modelled on what they behold
in the world. Every thought they possess, if correct, is a mere copy of
external nature; and yet it is assumed, that by some little legerdemain
arrangement of their reflections, they influence the course of the
intellectual world:” and, we presume, whatever is “in the world,” and in
“external nature,” is as visible to one man’s optics as to another’s.
This style of philosophizing will carry us far. Every picture which
Raphael ever painted, “if correct, is a mere copy of external nature;”
of that nature, too, which we can see with our bodily eyes, not solely
with those of our minds: argal, every man who has eyes, could have
painted the Transfiguration.15 Lavoisier’s discovery of the composition
of water,16 was “modelled on what he beheld in the world;” the hydrogen
and the oxygen were always before us, in every rivulet, and in every
cistern, “and yet it is assumed, that by some little arrangement” of
retorts and gas apparatus, he “influenced the course” of the science of
chemistry, and of the arts to which it is applied.

Edition: current; Page: [325]
Finally, our contemporary adds:

It is clear, we think, whether looked at theoretically or as a matter of
fact, that literature and literary men are of no more use to society, no
more instrumental in promoting its improvement, than is any other class
or any other art; and therefore, we conclude, no more to be pensioned
and provided for out of the people’s purse than is the weaver, for his
skill in cloth-making. The best reward for both is the common market of
the world; and what will not sell there is worth no man’s labour.

From this we may learn, that the sale of a book is always in exact
proportion to its utility; and mankind are as well able to discern, and
as eager to seek, that which will enlarge and elevate their minds, as
that which will please and beautify their bodies. The person whose mind
is capable of conceiving an opinion of this sort, must be a precious
observer of his age and of human nature.

If we were now to state our own opinion with respect to a public
provision for literary men, we should suggest to this writer a
distinction which, it would seem, is not “heard of in his philosophy.”17
We should remind him, that there are literary men, and literary works,
whose object is solely to give immediate pleasure, and other literary
men and literary works that aim at producing a permanent impression upon
the mind. The first we should, with him, regard as being on the same
footing in respect to public rewards, with “a mountebank or a
puppet-showman:” not because amusement in itself is not a worthy object
of pursuit, but because it is one for which mankind are always willing
to pay the full value. Accordingly, the amusement of the poor, who
cannot afford to pay for it, is a fit object of public provision; and
doubtless, as civilization advances, will be so considered.

In addition, however, to these writers, whose aim is only to please
mankind, there is another sort, who endeavour to educate them: to batter
down obstinate prejudices; to throw light on the dark places; to
discover and promulgate ideas, which must be meditated for years before
they will be appreciated; to form mankind to closer habits of thought;
to shame them out of whatever is mean and selfish in their behaviour; to
elevate their tastes; to inspire them with nobler and more beneficent
desires; to teach them that there are virtues which they have never
conceived, and pleasures beyond what they have ever enjoyed. These, by
the leave of our contemporary, are the labours, for which “the best
reward” is not always “the common market of the world.” This is a
literature which deserves a public provision, and which, unfortunately,
is too apt to require one; because such are not the services which
mankind are apt at first to requite with either their money or their
thanks.

But no enemy to a cause ever did more for its injury, than is done to
this cause by its friends, when they talk of giving “encouragement to
literature.”18 The Edition: current; Page: [326] phrase grates upon our
ears. Literature needs no encouragement. The man who engages in
literature from the motive of money, is false to his mission. It is the
curse of literature, that it is a trade. He who would inspire others
with high desires, must himself be inspired with them. He would teach
mankind to love truth and virtue for themselves, and shall he need any
other stimulus than the love of truth and virtue, in order to inculcate
them? What is due to literary men is not encouragement, but subsistence.
They ask not to be rewarded,—they ask to be kept alive, while they
continue to enlighten and civilize the world. They ask this, in order
that they may not, like so many of the first men of our own country, be
compelled to renounce or suspend the labours for which none others are
fit, and devote their lives to some merely gainful occupation, in order
that they may have bread to eat: or still worse, that they may not be
compelled by penury and dire dependance, which eat up so many minds fit
for better things, to prostitute their noble calling by base
compliances—to pander to selfishness and malignity, instead of wrestling
with them; to give utterance to the opinion which they hold not, to
counterfeit the emotion which they feel not, to find justification for
the evil-doer, instead of bringing him to shame—to become confounded
with the meanest of mankind, by sycophancy and base hypocrisy—or if they
sink not to this depth of infamy, at least to waste their highest
powers, by mixing among the herd of those who write merely to amuse.

It is most true, as our contemporary affirms, that the majority of our
literary men have long been of the low description, which we have just
attempted to characterize. But why is this? For several reasons, one of
the chief of which is, that such men, in this country, have not any
public provision. In Germany and France, where, through the universities
and various other institutions, a man of letters or science easily
obtains, by the sacrifice of a small part of his time, a respectable
subsistence—there, even under arbitrary governments, the lettered class
are really the highest and most cultivated minds of their several
nations. With us, they are dependant, for subsistence, upon the sale of
their works, and must consequently adapt themselves to the taste of
those who will buy. The buying class, until lately, have been the
aristocracy: which explains why, as our adversary says, our corrupt
institutions have “long been supported by the majority of literary men.”
When, subsequently to this, the mass of the people became buyers, books
were written which were addressed chiefly to them. As the people had not
the sinister interests of the aristocracy, the writings which were
addressed to them did not assume the same particular form of noxiousness
and wickedness, as those which were written for the ruling classes: but
they assumed other forms. And so it will be, if, by the Reform Bill and
its consequences, all the corruptions of our government are done away.
The people, as well as the aristocracy, like better to have their
opinions confirmed, than corrected. The people as well as the
aristocracy prefer those who chime in with their feelings, to those who
endeavour to improve them. After the Reform Bill as Edition: current;
Page: [327] before, it will be easier and more gainful to take men as
they now are, with their vices and weaknesses, and to give them the food
which pleases their vitiated palates, than to form their tastes and
their constitutions to healthier nourishment. And such will be the
character of all literature, which is got up for “the common market of
the world;” until mankind shall have attained a degree of civilization,
to which Parliamentary Reform may remove some of the obstacles, but
which of itself it gives not, nor ever can give.

But to prevent these evils, it is not necessary that any thing should be
added to the fiscal burdens by which we are already weighed down. It is
not requisite that the people should be taxed to give pensions to men of
literature and science. The endowments of our universities, now
squandered upon idle monks, are an ample fund already existing; a large
portion of which (the Fellowships) already is expended under that
pretext, and is of right appropriate to that purpose and to no other.
And a time, we trust, is coming, when to that, and no other purpose, it
will be applied.


110.: WHATELY’S INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON POLITICAL ECONOMY
 EXAMINER, 12 JUNE, 1831, P. 373

This is Mill’s first notice of an author he often referred to, Richard
Whately (1787-1863), cleric and prolific writer on religion, philosophy,
and political economy, who was Drummond Professor of Political Economy
at Oxford from 1829 until he became Archbishop of Dublin from 1831 until
his death. The review, which appears in the “Literary Examiner,” is
headed “Introductory Lectures on Political Economy: being part of a
Course delivered in Easter Term, 1831. By Richard Whately, D.D.,
Principal of St. Alban’s Hall, Professor of Political Economy in the
University of Oxford. [London: Fellowes, 1831.] 7s.” It is described in
Mill’s bibliography as “A review of Whately’s Introductory Lectures on
Political Economy; in the Examiner of the same date [as No. 109]”
(MacMinn, p. 16), and is similarly listed (without the “A”) and enclosed
in square brackets in the Somerville College set.

by the statute relative to the Professorship of Political Economy
endowed by Mr. Henry Drummond, it is prescribed, that the Professor
shall hold his office only for five years; and that he shall annually
publish at least one of his lectures.1 By virtue of the first provision,
the late able and excellent Professor, Mr. Senior, has resigned the
chair, and has been replaced by Dr. Whately; who now, in Edition:
current; Page: [328] compliance with the second injunction of the
founder, lays before the general public not one lecture merely, with
which scanty measure he might have contented himself, but the first
eight discourses, comprising the introductory division of his course.

If the English Church, and its Universities, possessed many such members
as Dr. Whately; or if the few whom it does possess, exercised the
influence which such men might be expected to exercise, over the general
spirit of the body; the prospects of the Church in this era of general
reformation would be very different from what they are. And of this no
one seems better aware than Dr. Whately himself. An author who writes in
earnest, if he writes much, cannot help betraying, to an intelligent
reader, the predominant feeling of his own mind. Now, in Dr. Whately,
the predominant feeling evidently is a consciousness and regret, that
nearly all the most important branches of useful knowledge are
possessed, in the present age, by various other persons indeed, but not
by that profession which is set apart and paid for the purpose, or under
the pretext, of civilizing and cultivating the human mind. And he is
deeply anxious that these persons, whose duty and vocation it is to
teach, should be prevailed upon to learn; in order that they may be at
least upon a level with those who are under no peculiar or professional
obligation of possessing knowledge. To impress upon them, both the
propriety and the prudence of thus bestirring themselves, is the purpose
which, more than any other, his labours, as an author, always seem to
have in view. And a highly laudable purpose it is: though it might have
been somewhat less prominent, without any loss to the general reader,
who has neither a rectory nor a fellowship to preserve, and who desires
knowledge for its own sake, and not on the score that it has become
indispensable to the safety of tithes.

In all other respects, this production is excellent. We know of no
existing work to which we can refer our readers for so clear, cogent,
and analytical a refutation of the fallacies, and exposure of the
perverse feelings, which disincline many weak, and some intelligent
persons, from the study of a branch of knowledge pre-eminently important
to all the best interests of mankind. We do not assert that the author
has exhausted the subject; nor can it ever be exhausted. We even think
that he has left unsaid several matters of importance, in order to have
room for others which his lay readers, at least, could have better
dispensed with. For example: he contends at great length against what he
terms the false and dangerous impression, that Political Economy is
unfavourable to religion. But where, we ask, was such an impression ever
entertained, except at Oxford? and who would have suspected that it was
entertained even there, if the Professor had not betrayed the secret?
But, since he assures us that such is the fact, we are compelled to give
credit to him; and to believe, that, in that ancient seat of learning,
the race of theologians still survives, who condemned the discoveries of
Galileo,2 inoculation, and the emetic, and who are firmly persuaded that
God Edition: current; Page: [329] never intended mankind to know any
thing more than what they know, on any subject whatsoever, moral or
physical.

We have no where seen the good qualities of Dr. Whately’s manner of
writing displayed to greater advantage than in this work. Among these we
may mention, as the most valuable, first, that he is pre-eminently
clear; and, secondly, that we may almost always learn from his writings
much more than what we sought for in them. The first excellency he
possesses, because he is perfectly master of all the steps in his own
deductions. The second he owes to habits of general observation and
reflection, by which (whatever be the subject on which he writes) he is
supplied with materials, applicable indeed to his immediate purpose, but
also covering a much larger extent of ground than that on which he
happens to be building. It is by this test, more than by any other, that
we distinguish the mind of general culture from that which is merely
cultivated at one or two points. Every one must have known men and
writers, who, if they confine themselves to what they are fit for,
accomplish it excellently well, but without either using in the
construction, or dropping by the way, one single idea which could
possibly be of use for any purpose in rerum naturâ save that one. Dr.
Whately is a man of a different description; and, consequently, all his
works, even those with the most unpromising titles, are valuable.


111.: REPLY OF THE BRIGHTON GUARDIAN TO THE EXAMINER
 EXAMINER, 19 JUNE, 1831, P. 387

Here Mill responds to “Literature and Patronage,” Brighton Guardian, 15
June, 1831, p. 2, which replied to No. 109. The article, headed as
title, appears in the “Political Examiner.” Described in Mill’s
bibliography as “An article headed ‘Reply of the Brighton Guardian to
the Examiner’; in the Examiner of 19th June 1831” (MacMinn, p. 17), the
article is listed as title and enclosed in square brackets in the
Somerville College set.

the brighton guardian has honoured our article of last Sunday by a
reply. His opinion is not changed; and as the manner in which he has
again presented it has produced no change in ours, we have no wish that
the discussion should proceed farther. The question will full surely
reproduce itself often enough; connected, as it is, with principles
which lie still deeper, and for which we may hereafter be called upon to
do battle, not solely with our present antagonist, but with some of the
strongest tendencies of the age. But as our contemporary, whose tone in
conducting the controversy is temperate and decorous, thinks that he has
reason to complain of ours, we are unwilling to quit the subject without
attempting to remove this impression.

We admit that we wronged our contemporary in representing him to have
asserted, that literary men are of no use. He merely affirmed (what,
however, is substantially the same) that they do not, in any material
degree, influence the Edition: current; Page: [330] opinions or
sentiments of mankind; and this he now repeats, calling in, as his
voucher, a writer in the Edinburgh Review, who says of men of genius,
that they are “only the first to catch and reflect the light, which,
without their assistance, must, in a short time have become visible to
those who were far beneath them.”1 We well remember the passage: but we
do not think that our contemporary derives much additional strength from
such backers. The stronger should not lean for support upon the weaker.
The doctrine, in the mind of the Edinburgh Reviewer, was but one of
those crude and thoughtless paradoxes, which unsettled and juvenile
minds think it clever to fling out at random: but in the mind of our
contemporary, we are bound to allow that to all appearance it forms part
of a connected course of thought. An opinion thus adopted belongs to a
far higher quality of mind, but to one of which the aberrations are
pregnant with far greater evil. Almost the only dangerous error is
systematic error.

We must have looked at our contemporary’s productions with as perverse
an eye, as we think he has at his subject, if we had, as he accuses us,
classed him “with the tribe of dunces.” He will find, on reperusing our
remarks, that we expressly distinguished him from that class. But we
could not help testifying our sense of the immense advantage which he
enjoyed, in having the whole tribe of dunces on his side: for we well
know how numerous, potent, and united a body these are. And we know,
that, in an age of transition, in which mankind have just found out that
their guides have lost their way, the spell of intellectual superiority
is broken, or greatly impaired, and the dunces are prone to believe that
they are fully competent to their own guidance, and that instruction and
intellect are no such mighty matters, after all. We are not blind to the
danger, or to the ridiculousness, of the self-worship to which literary
men are liable in common with all other possessors of power; but we deem
the self-idolatry of ignorance rather more ridiculous and dangerous
still; and the regret we felt at finding it countenanced by one who, in
no sense, belongs to the ignoble fraternity, alone provoked us to the
warmth of language of which our contemporary complains.

Be it remembered, that, lofty as are the claims which we have set up in
behalf of genius, we have never asserted that men are entitled to
consideration merely because they labour with the pen, rather than with
the hod. The honour due to any man depends not upon his occupation, but
upon the spirit in which he pursues it, and the qualities of mind which
he evinces in carrying it on. Nor have we said one word in exaltation or
vindication of the common herd of littérateurs, respecting whom our
opinion, in the main, coincides with that of our contemporary. The whole
mind of a reading nation is reflected in its literature; and we claim
admiration solely for the nobler parts of both. But the highest
literature is the food of the highest minds, without which they wither
and die. Edition: current; Page: [331] The Globe of Thursday last
contains an excellent article on the subject of this controversy, to
which we have great pleasure in calling the attention of our readers.2


112.: FLOWER’S MUSICAL ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE WAVERLEY NOVELS
 examiner, 3 july, 1831, pp. 420-1

Eliza Flower (1803-46), composer, was the closest friend of Harriet
Taylor (1807-58), whom Mill had met in the summer of 1830. Eliza and her
sister, Sarah (1805-48), were protégées of W.J. Fox (1786-1864), the
Unitarian preacher and journalist, who had contributed to the first
number of the Westminster Review and was one of Mill’s closest
associates in the early 1830s; he had been instrumental in introducing
Mill and Harriet. Flower set to music psalms and religious poems
(probably the best known was one for which her sister composed the
verses, “Nearer, My God, to Thee”), as well as secular works. The first
of the Waverley novels by Walter Scott (1771-1832) appeared in 1814. See
also Nos. 155, 197, 201, and 229. The article, in a section called
“Musical Review,” is headed: “Musical Illustrations of the Waverley
Novels, dedicated (by permission) to Sir Walter Scott, Bart. By Eliza
Flower. [London: Novello, [1831].]” Described in Mill’s bibliography as
“A review of Miss Flower’s Musical Illustrations of the Waverley Novels,
in the Examiner of 3d July 1831” (MacMinn, p. 17), the article is
similarly listed (without the “A”) and enclosed in square brackets in
the Somerville College set.

we omitted to notice this publication among the musical novelties of the
last month. Our apology is, that the music is of too high a character to
be judged of hastily. Much of it, indeed, cannot fail to please, even at
the first hearing: but, at the first hearing, it would most surely be
underrated.

It displays taste and sensibility of the highest order, and no common
genius—if the creation of that which is at once original and beautiful
be the privilege of genius. Nothing can be conceived more unlike the
everyday music which the composers for the common market copy from one
another. So little are this lady’s compositions the result of imitation
or memory, that they do not even resemble the works of the great
masters. They have a character of their own; distinctly and strikingly
individual; compounded, it should seem, of the peculiarities of the
poetry, and those of the composer’s mind: founded on a strong conception
of the meaning and spirit of the poetry; but adding so much to it, that
the inspiration she gives is almost equal to that which she receives.
One who can feel poetry so vividly, if she be as well accustomed to
clothe her conceptions in the language of words as in that of melody,
would surely give Edition: current; Page: [332] birth to poetry of her
own, not inferior to that with which she has inseparably associated
these most characteristic airs.

As the title implies, all the songs are selected from the Waverley
Novels, and are most aptly chosen. Their character is extremely various;
and the music rises and falls with the poetry. In proportion as more
invention and resource is required, more is shown: the composer easily
supplies all that the simpler and more ordinary subjects require; but
she puts forth her strength in grappling with the more difficult ones.
Yet the airs which are least poetical in themselves—or, rather, of which
the poetry is of the least elevated kind—will probably be the more
generally pleasing, for precisely the reason which makes Goldsmith1 a
more popular poet than Milton, or a landscape of Claude a more general
favourite than the St. Sebastian of Guido.2 Among this portion of the
songs, we would particularly recommend to attention the serenade from
the Pirate, “Love wakes and weeps;”3 and a sweet air called “The Song of
Annot Lyle.”4 Nothing can be simpler, and at the same time less
common-place, than this little melody. There is one very unusual
interval in it, which gives a peculiar tinge to the whole, and which is
scarcely ever found in modern music: though it is to be met with in one
or two of the best Scottish airs.

The pieces which we ourselves most admire are the following three:—No.
5, “Meg Merrilies’ Chaunt,” a wail over a dying person. No. 8, “The
Death of Madge Wildfire;” every one must remember that most affecting
passage, perhaps, in the most pathetic tale of the whole Waverley
series.5 The music consists of four different movements, of which the
first two are beautiful melodies, of a somewhat subdued character;
followed by two others most characteristically wild—the last of which
declines into the loveliest passage, perhaps, in the whole volume. (P.
43.)

There is one other song of the same elevated character, No. 2, “The Lady
in St. Swithin’s Chair.” This is an example of what we sometimes, though
rarely, meet with—first-rate ballad music; that is to say, an air
sufficiently simple not to seem too lofty for the plainer and merely
narrative parts of a ballad, and which Edition: current; Page: [333]
yet, when the words rise into energy and dignity, rises with them, and
sustains them with a majesty equal to their own. But the highest flight
of imagination is at the close of this ballad, in the music of the
stanzas describing the appearance of the night-hag.

-   

    -   

        She shudders and stops, as the charm she speaks!
    -   

        Is it the moody owl that shrieks?
    -   

        Or is that sound, betwixt laughter and scream,
    -   

        The voice of the demon that haunts the stream?

-   

    -   

        The moan of the wind sunk silent and low;
    -   

        The roaring torrent has ceased to flow;
    -   

        The calm was more dreadful than raging storm,
    -   

        When the cold grey mist brought the ghastly form!6

We envy the real lover of music the pleasure which he will receive from
the accompaniment of the former of these stanzas, and from the melody of
the latter, which changes to another strain of great sweetness in
itself, and admirably embodying the character of the words.

Among the livelier pieces, our greatest favourite is No. 4, the “Song of
Norman the Forester,” in the Bride of Lammermoor.7 These, perhaps,
resemble one another too much, at least in their rhythm: but each in
itself is pretty, and suited to the words.

No. 1 is a quartette;8 and several others terminate in quartettes or
trios. These we have not yet had an opportunity of hearing properly
executed: the melody, however, (as in so many of Mozart’s concerted
pieces)9 shews itself in the accompaniment. No. 1, even as a mere
instrumental piece, will please all lovers of chaste and expressive
music.

One of the songs, No. 6,10 is avowedly a mere adaptation of a beautiful
French air. The melody is as characteristic of the words as if it had
been written for them; and it is extremely well arranged.
